Energy is defined as the ability to do work. As you’ve learned, energy exists in different forms. For example, electrical
energy, light energy, and heat energy are all different types of energy. While these are all familiar types of energy that one
can see or feel, there is another type of energy that is much less tangible. This energy is associated with something as simple
as an object held above the ground. In order to appreciate the way energy flows into and out of biological systems, it is
important to understand more about the different types of energy that exist in the physical world.
Types of Energy
When an object is in motion, there is energy associated with that object. In the example of an airplane in flight, there is a
great deal of energy associated with the motion of the airplane. This is because moving objects are capable of enacting a
change, or doing work. Think of a wrecking ball. Even a slow-moving wrecking ball can do a great deal of damage to other
objects. However, a wrecking ball that is not in motion is incapable of performing work. Energy associated with objects in
motion is called kinetic energy. A speeding bullet, a walking person, the rapid movement of molecules in the air (which
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
243

produces heat), and electromagnetic radiation like light all have kinetic energy.
Now what if that same motionless wrecking ball is lifted two stories above a car with a crane? If the suspended wrecking
ball is unmoving, is there energy associated with it? The answer is yes. The suspended wrecking ball has energy associated
with it that is fundamentally different from the kinetic energy of objects in motion. This form of energy results from the
fact that there is the potential for the wrecking ball to do work. If it is released, indeed it would do work. Because this type
of energy refers to the potential to do work, it is called potential energy. Objects transfer their energy between kinetic and
potential in the following way: As the wrecking ball hangs motionless, it has 0 kinetic and 100 percent potential energy.
Once it is released, its kinetic energy begins to increase because it builds speed due to gravity. At the same time, as it nears
the ground, it loses potential energy. Somewhere mid-fall it has 50 percent kinetic and 50 percent potential energy. Just
before it hits the ground, the ball has nearly lost its potential energy and has near-maximal kinetic energy. Other examples of
potential energy include the energy of water held behind a dam (Figure 6.6), or a person about to skydive out of an airplane.
Figure 6.6 Water behind a dam has potential energy. Moving water, such as in a waterfall or a rapidly flowing river, has
kinetic energy. (credit “dam”: modification of work by "Pascal"/Flickr; credit “waterfall”: modification of work by Frank
Gualtieri)
Potential energy is not only associated with the location of matter (such as a child sitting on a tree branch), but also with the
structure of matter. A spring on the ground has potential energy if it is compressed; so does a rubber band that is pulled taut.
The very existence of living cells relies heavily on structural potential energy. On a chemical level, the bonds that hold the
atoms of molecules together have potential energy. Remember that anabolic cellular pathways require energy to synthesize
complex molecules from simpler ones, and catabolic pathways release energy when complex molecules are broken down.
The fact that energy can be released by the breakdown of certain chemical bonds implies that those bonds have potential
energy. In fact, there is potential energy stored within the bonds of all the food molecules we eat, which is eventually
harnessed for use. This is because these bonds can release energy when broken. The type of potential energy that exists
within chemical bonds, and is released when those bonds are broken, is called chemical energy (Figure 6.7). Chemical
energy is responsible for providing living cells with energy from food. The release of energy is brought about by breaking
the molecular bonds within fuel molecules.
244
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12078/1.6

Figure 6.7 The molecules in gasoline (octane, the chemical formula shown) contain chemical energy within the
chemical bonds. This energy is transformed into kinetic energy that allows a car to race on a racetrack. (credit “car”:
modification of work by Russell Trow)
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/simple_pendulum) and select “A simple pendulum” on the menu (under
“Harmonic Motion”) to see the shifting kinetic (K) and potential energy (U) of a pendulum in motion.
Explain how the potential and kinetic energy shown in the pendulum model (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
simple_pendulum) relates to a child swinging on a swing set.
a.
Kinetic energy increases when the child swings downward, potential energy increases when the child swings
upward.
b.
Kinetic energy decreases when the child swings downward, potential energy decreases when the child swings
upward.
c.
Kinetic energy increases when the child swings upward, potential energy increases when the child swings
downward.
d.
Kinetic energy increases when child swings downward, potential energy increases when the child swings
downward.
Free Energy
After learning that chemical reactions release energy when energy-storing bonds are broken, an important next question
is how is the energy associated with chemical reactions quantified and expressed? How can the energy released from
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
245

one reaction be compared to that of another reaction? A measurement of free energy is used to quantitate these energy
transfers. Free energy is called Gibbs free energy (abbreviated with the letter G) after Josiah Willard Gibbs, the scientist
who developed the measurement. Recall that according to the second law of thermodynamics, all energy transfers involve
the loss of some amount of energy in an unusable form such as heat, resulting in entropy. Gibbs free energy specifically
refers to the energy associated with a chemical reaction that is available after entropy is accounted for. In other words, Gibbs
free energy is usable energy, or energy that is available to do work.
Every chemical reaction involves a change in free energy, called delta G (∆G). The change in free energy can be calculated
for any system that undergoes such a change, such as a chemical reaction. To calculate ∆G, subtract the amount of energy
lost to entropy (denoted as ∆S) from the total energy change of the system. This total energy change in the system is called
enthalpy and is denoted as ∆H . The formula for calculating ∆G is as follows, where the symbol T refers to absolute
temperature in Kelvin (degrees Celsius + 273):
ΔG = ΔH − TΔS
The standard free energy change of a chemical reaction is expressed as an amount of energy per mole of the reaction product
(either in kilojoules or kilocalories, kJ/mol or kcal/mol; 1 kJ = 0.239 kcal) under standard pH, temperature, and pressure
conditions. Standard pH, temperature, and pressure conditions are generally calculated at pH 7.0 in biological systems,
25 degrees Celsius, and 100 kilopascals (1 atm pressure), respectively. It is important to note that cellular conditions vary
considerably from these standard conditions, and so standard calculated ∆G values for biological reactions will be different
inside the cell.
Endergonic Reactions and Exergonic Reactions
If energy is released during a chemical reaction, then the resulting value from the above equation will be a negative number.
In other words, reactions that release energy have a ∆G < 0. A negative ∆G also means that the products of the reaction
have less free energy than the reactants, because they gave off some free energy during the reaction. Reactions that have a
negative ∆G and consequently release free energy are called exergonic reactions. Think: exergonic means energy is exiting
the system. These reactions are also referred to as spontaneous reactions, because they can occur without the addition of
energy into the system. Understanding which chemical reactions are spontaneous and release free energy is extremely useful
for biologists, because these reactions can be harnessed to perform work inside the cell. An important distinction must be
drawn between the term spontaneous and the idea of a chemical reaction that occurs immediately. Contrary to the everyday
use of the term, a spontaneous reaction is not one that suddenly or quickly occurs. The rusting of iron is an example of a
spontaneous reaction that occurs slowly, little by little, over time.
If a chemical reaction requires an input of energy rather than releasing energy, then the ∆G for that reaction will be a
positive value. In this case, the products have more free energy than the reactants. Thus, the products of these reactions can
be thought of as energy-storing molecules. These chemical reactions are called endergonic reactions, and they are non-
spontaneous. An endergonic reaction will not take place on its own without the addition of free energy.
Let’s revisit the example of the synthesis and breakdown of the food molecule, glucose. Remember that the building of
complex molecules, such as sugars, from simpler ones is an anabolic process and requires energy. Therefore, the chemical
reactions involved in anabolic processes are endergonic reactions. On the other hand, the catabolic process of breaking
sugar down into simpler molecules releases energy in a series of exergonic reactions. Like the example of rust above, the
breakdown of sugar involves spontaneous reactions, but these reactions don’t occur instantaneously. Figure 6.8 shows some
other examples of endergonic and exergonic reactions. Later sections will provide more information about what else is
required to make even spontaneous reactions happen more efficiently.
246
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12078/1.6

Figure 6.8 Shown are some examples of endergonic processes (ones that require energy) and exergonic
processes (ones that release energy). These include (a) a compost pile decomposing, (b) a chick developing from
a fertilized egg, (c) sand art being destroyed, and (d) a ball rolling down a hill. (credit a: modification of work by
Natalie Maynor; credit b: modification of work by USDA; credit c: modification of work by “Athlex”/Flickr; credit d:
modification of work by Harry Malsch)
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
247

Look at each of the processes shown, and decide if it is endergonic or exergonic. In each case, does enthalpy increase
or decrease, and does entropy increase or decrease?
a.
Compost pile decomposition is endergonic, enthalpy increases and entropy increases. A baby developing
from egg is an endergonic process, enthalpy decreases and entropy decreases. Sand art being destroyed
is exergonic, no change in enthalpy and entropy increases. A ball rolling downhill is exergonic process,
enthalpy decreases and no change in entropy.
b.
Compost pile decomposition is exergonic, enthalpy increases and entropy increases. A baby developing
from egg is an endergonic process, enthalpy decreases and entropy decreases. Sand art being destroyed
is exergonic, no change in enthalpy and entropy decreases. A ball rolling downhill is exergonic process,
enthalpy decreases and no change in entropy.
c.
Compost pile decomposition is exergonic, enthalpy increases and entropy increases. A baby developing
from egg is an endergonic process, enthalpy decreases and entropy decreases. Sand art being destroyed
is exergonic, no change in enthalpy and entropy increases. A ball rolling downhill is exergonic process,
enthalpy decreases and entropy increases.
d.
A ball rolling down the hill doesn’t affect the order of system; therefore, the entropy would remain
unchanged.
An important concept in the study of metabolism and energy is that of chemical equilibrium. Most chemical reactions are
reversible. They can proceed in both directions, releasing energy into their environment in one direction, and absorbing
it from the environment in the other direction (Figure 6.9). The same is true for the chemical reactions involved in cell
metabolism, such as the breaking down and building up of proteins into and from individual amino acids, respectively.
Reactants within a closed system will undergo chemical reactions in both directions until a state of equilibrium is reached.
This state of equilibrium is one of the lowest possible free energy and a state of maximal entropy. Energy must be put
into the system to push the reactants and products away from a state of equilibrium. Either reactants or products must
248
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12078/1.6

be added, removed, or changed. If a cell were a closed system, its chemical reactions would reach equilibrium, and it
would die because there would be insufficient free energy left to perform the work needed to maintain life. In a living
cell, chemical reactions are constantly moving towards equilibrium, but never reach it. This is because a living cell is an
open system. Materials pass in and out, the cell recycles the products of certain chemical reactions into other reactions, and
chemical equilibrium is never reached. In this way, living organisms are in a constant energy-requiring, uphill battle against
equilibrium and entropy. This constant supply of energy ultimately comes from sunlight, which is used to produce nutrients
in the process of photosynthesis.
Figure 6.9 Exergonic and endergonic reactions result in changes in Gibbs free energy. Exergonic reactions release
energy; endergonic reactions require energy to proceed.
Activation Energy
There is another important concept that must be considered regarding endergonic and exergonic reactions. Even exergonic
reactions require a small amount of energy input to get going before they can proceed with their energy-releasing steps.
These reactions have a net release of energy, but still require some energy in the beginning. This small amount of energy
input necessary for all chemical reactions to occur is called the activation energy (or free energy of activation) and is
abbreviated EA (Figure 6.10).
Why would an energy-releasing, negative ∆G reaction actually require some energy to proceed? The reason lies in the
steps that take place during a chemical reaction. During chemical reactions, certain chemical bonds are broken and new
ones are formed. For example, when a glucose molecule is broken down, bonds between the carbon atoms of the molecule
are broken. Since these are energy-storing bonds, they release energy when broken. However, to get them into a state that
allows the bonds to break, the molecule must be somewhat contorted. A small energy input is required to achieve this
contorted state. This contorted state is called the transition state, and it is a high-energy, unstable state. For this reason,
reactant molecules don’t last long in their transition state, but very quickly proceed to the next steps of the chemical reaction.
Free energy diagrams illustrate the energy profiles for a given reaction. Whether the reaction is exergonic or endergonic
determines whether the products in the diagram will exist at a lower or higher energy state than both the reactants and the
products. However, regardless of this measure, the transition state of the reaction exists at a higher energy state than the
reactants, and thus, EA is always positive.
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
249

Watch an animation of the move from free energy to transition state at this (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
energy_reaction) site.
Explain why transitional states are unstable.
a.
Molecules have relaxed molecular structure with low energy.
b.
Molecules have strained molecular structure with high energy.
c.
Molecules have relaxed molecular structure with high energy.
d.
Molecules have strained molecular structure with low energy.
Where does the activation energy required by chemical reactants come from? The source of the activation energy needed
to push reactions forward is typically heat energy from the surroundings. Heat energy (the total bond energy of reactants
or products in a chemical reaction) speeds up the motion of molecules, increasing the frequency and force with which they
collide; it also moves atoms and bonds within the molecule slightly, helping them reach their transition state. For this reason,
heating up a system will cause chemical reactants within that system to react more frequently. Increasing the pressure on a
system has the same effect. Once reactants have absorbed enough heat energy from their surroundings to reach the transition
state, the reaction will proceed.
The activation energy of a particular reaction determines the rate at which it will proceed. The higher the activation energy,
the slower the chemical reaction will be. The example of iron rusting illustrates an inherently slow reaction. This reaction
occurs slowly over time because of its high EA. Additionally, the burning of many fuels, which is strongly exergonic, will
take place at a negligible rate unless their activation energy is overcome by sufficient heat from a spark. Once they begin to
burn, however, the chemical reactions release enough heat to continue the burning process, supplying the activation energy
for surrounding fuel molecules. Like these reactions outside of cells, the activation energy for most cellular reactions is
too high for heat energy to overcome at efficient rates. In other words, in order for important cellular reactions to occur
at appreciable rates (number of reactions per unit time), their activation energies must be lowered (Figure 6.10); this is
referred to as catalysis. This is a very good thing as far as living cells are concerned. Important macromolecules, such
as proteins, DNA, and RNA, store considerable energy, and their breakdown is exergonic. If cellular temperatures alone
provided enough heat energy for these exergonic reactions to overcome their activation barriers, the essential components
of a cell would disintegrate.
250
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12078/1.6

Figure 6.10 Activation energy is the energy required for a reaction to proceed, and it is lower if the reaction is
catalyzed. The horizontal axis of this diagram describes the sequence of events in time.
How does the change in Gibbs free energy (ΔG) differ between the catalyzed versus uncatalyzed reaction?
a.
ΔG is greater for the forward direction than for the reverse direction.
b.
ΔG is greater for the uncatalyzed than the catalyzed reaction.
c.
ΔG is greater for the catalyzed than the uncatalyzed reaction.
d.
ΔG is the same for the catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions.
Think About It
All plants use water, carbon dioxide, and energy from the sun to make sugars. Think about what would happen to plants
that do not have sunlight as an energy source or sufficient water. What would happen to organisms that depend on
those plants for their own survival? How does depletion or destruction of forests by human activity affect free energy
availability to organisms living in the rain forest? What measures can be taken to try and restore the free energy to an
acceptable level?
Section Summary
Energy comes in many different forms. Objects in motion do physical work, and kinetic energy is the energy of objects
in motion. Objects that are not in motion may have the potential to do work, and thus, have potential energy. Molecules
also have potential energy because the breaking of molecular bonds has the potential to release energy. Living cells depend
on the harvesting of potential energy from molecular bonds to perform work. Free energy is a measure of energy that is
available to do work. The free energy of a system changes during energy transfers such as chemical reactions, and this
change is referred to as ∆G.
The ∆G of a reaction can be negative or positive, meaning that the reaction releases energy or consumes energy, respectively.
A reaction with a negative ∆G that gives off energy is called an exergonic reaction. One with a positive ∆G that requires
energy input is called an endergonic reaction. Exergonic reactions are said to be spontaneous, because their products have
less energy than their reactants. The products of endergonic reactions have a higher energy state than the reactants, and so
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
251

these are nonspontaneous reactions. However, all reactions (including spontaneous –∆G reactions) require an initial input
of energy in order to reach the transition state, at which they’ll proceed. This initial input of energy is called the activation
energy.
6.3 | The Laws of Thermodynamics
In this section, you will explore the following questions:
•
What is entropy?
•
What is the difference between the first and second laws of thermodynamics?
Connection for AP® Courses
In studying energy, scientists use the term system to refer to the matter and its environment involved in energy transfers,
such as an ecosystem. Even single cells are biological systems and all systems require energy to maintain order. The more
ordered a system is, the lower its entropy. Entropy is a measure of the disorder of the system. (Think of your bedroom as a
system. On Sunday evening, you throw dirty clothes in the laundry basket, put books back on the shelves, and return dirty
dishes to the kitchen. Cleaning your room requires an input of energy. What gradually happens as the week progresses? You
guessed it: entropy.) All biological systems obey the laws of chemistry and physics, including the laws of thermodynamics
that describe the properties and processes of energy transfer in systems. The first law states that the total amount of energy
in the universe is constant; energy cannot be created or destroyed, but it can be transformed and transferred. The second
law states that every energy transfer involves some loss of energy in an unusable form, such as heat energy, resulting in a
more disordered system (e.g., your bedroom over the course of a week). Thus, no energy transfer is completely efficient.
(We will explore how free energy is stored, transferred, and used in more detail when we study photosynthesis and cellular
respiration.)
Information presented and the examples highlighted in the section, support concepts and Learning Objectives outlined in
Big Idea 2 of the AP® Biology Curriculum Framework. The Learning Objectives listed in the Curriculum Framework
provide a transparent foundation for the AP® Biology course, an inquiry-based laboratory experience, instructional
activities, and AP® Exam questions. A Learning Objective merges required content with one or more of the seven Science
Practices.
Big Idea 2
Biological systems utilize free energy and molecular building blocks to grow, to reproduce,
and to maintain dynamic homeostasis.
Enduring
Understanding
2.A
Growth, reproduction and maintenance of living systems require free energy and matter.
Essential
Knowledge
2.A.1 All living systems require constant input of free energy.
Science
Practice
6.2 The student can construct explanations of phenomena based on evidence produced
through scientific practices.
Learning
Objective
2.1 The student is able to explain how biological systems use free energy based on empirical
data that all organisms require constant energy input to maintain organization, to grow, and
to reproduce.
The Science Practice Challenge Questions contain additional test questions for this section that will help you prepare for
the AP exam. These questions address the following standards:
[APLO 2.1][APLO 2.2][APLO 2.4][APLO 4.16][APLO 2.3]
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter. The matter and its
environment relevant to a particular case of energy transfer are classified as a system, and everything outside of that system
is called the surroundings. For instance, when heating a pot of water on the stove, the system includes the stove, the pot, and
the water. Energy is transferred within the system (between the stove, pot, and water). There are two types of systems: open
252
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12078/1.6

and closed. An open system is one in which energy can be transferred between the system and its surroundings. The stovetop
system is open because heat can be lost into the air. A closed system is one that cannot transfer energy to its surroundings.
Biological organisms are open systems. Energy is exchanged between them and their surroundings, as they consume energy-
storing molecules and release energy to the environment by doing work. Like all things in the physical world, energy is
subject to the laws of physics. The laws of thermodynamics govern the transfer of energy in and among all systems in the
universe.
The First Law of Thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics deals with the total amount of energy in the universe. It states that this total amount
of energy is constant. In other words, there has always been, and always will be, exactly the same amount of energy
in the universe. Energy exists in many different forms. According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy may be
transferred from place to place or transformed into different forms, but it cannot be created or destroyed. The transfers and
transformations of energy take place around us all the time. Light bulbs transform electrical energy into light energy. Gas
stoves transform chemical energy from natural gas into heat energy. Plants perform one of the most biologically useful
energy transformations on earth: that of converting the energy of sunlight into the chemical energy stored within organic
molecules, as shown in Figure 6.2. Some examples of energy transformations are shown in Figure 6.11.
The challenge for all living organisms is to obtain energy from their surroundings in forms that they can transfer or
transform into usable energy to do work. Living cells have evolved to meet this challenge very well. Chemical energy stored
within organic molecules such as sugars and fats is transformed through a series of cellular chemical reactions into energy
within molecules of ATP. Energy in ATP molecules is easily accessible to do work. Examples of the types of work that cells
need to do include building complex molecules, transporting materials, powering the beating motion of cilia or flagella,
contracting muscle fibers to create movement, and reproduction.
Figure 6.11 Shown are two examples of energy being transferred from one system to another and transformed from
one form to another. Humans can convert the chemical energy in food, like this ice cream cone, into kinetic energy
(the energy of movement to ride a bicycle). Plants can convert electromagnetic radiation (light energy) from the sun
into chemical energy. (credit “ice cream”: modification of work by D. Sharon Pruitt; credit “kids on bikes”: modification
of work by Michelle Riggen-Ransom; credit “leaf”: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
A living cell’s primary tasks of obtaining, transforming, and using energy to do work may seem simple. However,
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
253

the second law of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are harder than they appear. None of the energy transfers
we’ve discussed, along with all energy transfers and transformations in the universe, is completely efficient. In every
energy transfer, some amount of energy is lost in a form that is unusable. In most cases, this form is heat energy.
Thermodynamically, heat energy is defined as the energy transferred from one system to another that is not doing work.
For example, when an airplane flies through the air, some of the energy of the flying plane is lost as heat energy due to
friction with the surrounding air. This friction actually heats the air by temporarily increasing the speed of air molecules.
Likewise, some energy is lost as heat energy during cellular metabolic reactions. This is good for warm-blooded creatures
like us, because heat energy helps to maintain our body temperature. Strictly speaking, no energy transfer is completely
efficient, because some energy is lost in an unusable form.
An important concept in physical systems is that of order and disorder (also known as randomness). The more energy that
is lost by a system to its surroundings, the less ordered and more random the system is. Scientists refer to the measure of
randomness or disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy means high disorder and low energy (Figure 6.12). To
better understand entropy, think of a student’s bedroom. If no energy or work were put into it, the room would quickly
become messy. It would exist in a very disordered state, one of high entropy. Energy must be put into the system, in the form
of the student doing work and putting everything away, in order to bring the room back to a state of cleanliness and order.
This state is one of low entropy. Similarly, a car or house must be constantly maintained with work in order to keep it in an
ordered state. Left alone, the entropy of the house or car gradually increases through rust and degradation. Molecules and
chemical reactions have varying amounts of entropy as well. For example, as chemical reactions reach a state of equilibrium,
entropy increases, and as molecules at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out, entropy also increases.
Transfer of Energy and the Resulting Entropy
Set up a simple experiment to understand how energy is transferred and how a change in entropy results.
1.
Take a block of ice. This is water in solid form, so it has a high structural order. This means that the
molecules cannot move very much and are in a fixed position. The temperature of the ice is 0°C. As a
result, the entropy of the system is low.
2.
Allow the ice to melt at room temperature. What is the state of molecules in the liquid water now? How
did the energy transfer take place? Is the entropy of the system higher or lower? Why?
3.
Heat the water to its boiling point. What happens to the entropy of the system when the water is
heated?
All physical systems can be thought of in this way: Living things are highly ordered, requiring constant energy input to
be maintained in a state of low entropy. As living systems take in energy-storing molecules and transform them through
chemical reactions, they lose some amount of usable energy in the process, because no reaction is completely efficient. They
also produce waste and by-products that aren’t useful energy sources. This process increases the entropy of the system’s
surroundings. Since all energy transfers result in the loss of some usable energy, the second law of thermodynamics states
that every energy transfer or transformation increases the entropy of the universe. Even though living things are highly
ordered and maintain a state of low entropy, the entropy of the universe in total is constantly increasing due to the loss of
usable energy with each energy transfer that occurs. Essentially, living things are in a continuous uphill battle against this
constant increase in universal entropy.
254
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12078/1.6

Figure 6.12 Entropy is a measure of randomness or disorder in a system. Gases have higher entropy than liquids, and
liquids have higher entropy than solids.
Think About It
•
Imagine a large ant colony with an elaborate nest, containing many tunnels and passageways. Now imagine that
an earthquake shakes the ground and demolishes the nest. Did the ant nest have higher entropy before or after the
earthquake? What can the ants do to restore their nest to close to its original amount of entropy? Explain your
answers.
•
Energy transfers take place constantly in everyday activities. Think of two scenarios: cooking on a stove and
driving a car. Explain how the second law of thermodynamics applies to these two scenarios.
Section Summary
In studying energy, scientists use the term “system” to refer to the matter and its environment involved in energy transfers.
Everything outside of the system is called the surroundings. Single cells are biological systems. Systems can be thought of
as having a certain amount of order. It takes energy to make a system more ordered. The more ordered a system is, the lower
its entropy. Entropy is a measure of the disorder of a system. As a system becomes more disordered, the lower its energy
and the higher its entropy become.
A series of laws, called the laws of thermodynamics, describe the properties and processes of energy transfer. The first law
states that the total amount of energy in the universe is constant. This means that energy can’t be created or destroyed,
only transferred or transformed. The second law of thermodynamics states that every energy transfer involves some loss of
energy in an unusable form, such as heat energy, resulting in a more disordered system. In other words, no energy transfer
is completely efficient and tends toward disorder.
6.4 | ATP: Adenosine Triphosphate
In this section, you will explore the following questions:
•
Why is ATP considered the energy currency of the cell?
•
How is energy released through the hydrolysis of ATP?
Chapter 6 | Metabolism
255

Connection for AP® Courses
Adenosine triphosphate or ATP is the energy “currency” or carrier of the cell. When cells require an input of energy, they
use ATP. An ATP nucleotide molecule consists of a five-carbon sugar, the nitrogenous base adenine, and three phosphate
groups. (Do not confuse ATP with the nucleotides of DNA and RNA, although they have structural similarities.) The bonds
that connect the phosphate have high-energy content, and the energy released from the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP + Pi
(Adenosine Diphosphate + Pyrophosphate) is used to perform cellular work, such as contracting a muscle or pumping a
solute across a cell membrane in active transport. Cells use ATP by coupling the exergonic reaction of ATP hydrolysis with
endergonic reactions, with ATP donating its phosphate group to another molecule via a process called phosphorylation.
The phosphorylated molecule is at a higher energy state and is less stable than its unphosphorylated form and free energy
is released to substrates to perform work during this process. Phosphorylation is an example of energy transfer between
molecules.

