Every society, at every level, must make choices about how to use its resources. Families must decide whether to
spend their money on a new car or a fancy vacation. Towns must choose whether to put more of the budget into police
and fire protection or into the school system. Nations must decide whether to devote more funds to national defense
or to protecting the environment. In most cases, there just isn’t enough money in the budget to do everything. How do
we use our limited resources the best way possible, that is, to obtain the most goods and services we can? There are
a couple of options. First, we could each produce everything we each consume. Alternatively, we could each produce
some of what we want to consume, and “trade” for the rest of what we want. Let’s explore these options. Why do we
not each just produce all of the things we consume? Think back to pioneer days, when individuals knew how to do so
much more than we do today, from building their homes, to growing their crops, to hunting for food, to repairing their
equipment. Most of us do not know how to do all—or any—of those things, but it is not because we could not learn.
Rather, we do not have to. The reason why is something called the division and specialization of labor, a production
innovation first put forth by Adam Smith (Figure 1.3) in his book, The Wealth of Nations.
Figure 1.3 Adam Smith Adam Smith introduced the idea of dividing labor into discrete tasks. (Credit: Wikimedia
Commons)
The Division of and Specialization of Labor
The formal study of economics began when Adam Smith (1723–1790) published his famous book The Wealth of
Nations in 1776. Many authors had written on economics in the centuries before Smith, but he was the first to address
the subject in a comprehensive way. In the first chapter, Smith introduces the concept of division of labor, which
means that the way one produces a good or service is divided into a number of tasks that different workers perform,
instead of all the tasks being done by the same person.
To illustrate division of labor, Smith counted how many tasks went into making a pin: drawing out a piece of wire,
cutting it to the right length, straightening it, putting a head on one end and a point on the other, and packaging pins
for sale, to name just a few. Smith counted 18 distinct tasks that different people performed—all for a pin, believe it
or not!
Modern businesses divide tasks as well. Even a relatively simple business like a restaurant divides the task of serving
meals into a range of jobs like top chef, sous chefs, less-skilled kitchen help, servers to wait on the tables, a greeter
at the door, janitors to clean up, and a business manager to handle paychecks and bills—not to mention the economic
12
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col23729/1.3

connections a restaurant has with suppliers of food, furniture, kitchen equipment, and the building where it is located.
A complex business like a large manufacturing factory, such as the shoe factory (Figure 1.4), or a hospital can have
hundreds of job classifications.
Figure 1.4 Division of Labor Workers on an assembly line are an example of the divisions of labor. (Credit: Nina
Hale/Flickr Creative Commons)
Why the Division of Labor Increases Production
When we divide and subdivide the tasks involved with producing a good or service, workers and businesses can
produce a greater quantity of output. In his observations of pin factories, Smith noticed that one worker alone might
make 20 pins in a day, but that a small business of 10 workers (some of whom would need to complete two or three
of the 18 tasks involved with pin-making), could make 48,000 pins in a day. How can a group of workers, each
specializing in certain tasks, produce so much more than the same number of workers who try to produce the entire
good or service by themselves? Smith offered three reasons.
First, specialization in a particular small job allows workers to focus on the parts of the production process where
they have an advantage. (In later chapters, we will develop this idea by discussing comparative advantage.) People
have different skills, talents, and interests, so they will be better at some jobs than at others. The particular advantages
may be based on educational choices, which are in turn shaped by interests and talents. Only those with medical
degrees qualify to become doctors, for instance. For some goods, geography affects specialization. For example, it is
easier to be a wheat farmer in North Dakota than in Florida, but easier to run a tourist hotel in Florida than in North
Dakota. If you live in or near a big city, it is easier to attract enough customers to operate a successful dry cleaning
business or movie theater than if you live in a sparsely populated rural area. Whatever the reason, if people specialize
in the production of what they do best, they will be more effective than if they produce a combination of things, some
of which they are good at and some of which they are not.
Second, workers who specialize in certain tasks often learn to produce more quickly and with higher quality. This
pattern holds true for many workers, including assembly line laborers who build cars, stylists who cut hair, and
doctors who perform heart surgery. In fact, specialized workers often know their jobs well enough to suggest
innovative ways to do their work faster and better.
A similar pattern often operates within businesses. In many cases, a business that focuses on one or a few products
(sometimes called its “core competency”) is more successful than firms that try to make a wide range of products.
Third, specialization allows businesses to take advantage of economies of scale, which means that for many goods,
as the level of production increases, the average cost of producing each individual unit declines. For example, if a
factory produces only 100 cars per year, each car will be quite expensive to make on average. However, if a factory
produces 50,000 cars each year, then it can set up an assembly line with huge machines and workers performing
specialized tasks, and the average cost of production per car will be lower. The ultimate result of workers who can
focus on their preferences and talents, learn to do their specialized jobs better, and work in larger organizations is that
society as a whole can produce and consume far more than if each person tried to produce all of his or her own goods
and services. The division and specialization of labor has been a force against the problem of scarcity.
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
13

Trade and Markets
Specialization only makes sense, though, if workers can use the pay they receive for doing their jobs to purchase the
other goods and services that they need. In short, specialization requires trade.
You do not have to know anything about electronics or sound systems to play music—you just buy an iPod or MP3
player, download the music, and listen. You do not have to know anything about artificial fibers or the construction of
sewing machines if you need a jacket—you just buy the jacket and wear it. You do not need to know anything about
internal combustion engines to operate a car—you just get in and drive. Instead of trying to acquire all the knowledge
and skills involved in producing all of the goods and services that you wish to consume, the market allows you to
learn a specialized set of skills and then use the pay you receive to buy the goods and services you need or want. This
is how our modern society has evolved into a strong economy.
Why Study Economics?
Now that you have an overview on what economics studies, let’s quickly discuss why you are right to study it.
Economics is not primarily a collection of facts to memorize, although there are plenty of important concepts to learn.
Instead, think of economics as a collection of questions to answer or puzzles to work. Most importantly, economics
provides the tools to solve those puzzles. If the economics “bug” has not bitten you yet, there are other reasons why
you should study economics.
• Virtually every major problem facing the world today, from global warming, to world poverty, to the conflicts
in Syria, Afghanistan, and Somalia, has an economic dimension. If you are going to be part of solving those
problems, you need to be able to understand them. Economics is crucial.
• It is hard to overstate the importance of economics to good citizenship. You need to be able to vote
intelligently on budgets, regulations, and laws in general. When the U.S. government came close to a standstill
at the end of 2012 due to the “fiscal cliff,” what were the issues? Did you know?
• A basic understanding of economics makes you a well-rounded thinker. When you read articles about
economic issues, you will understand and be able to evaluate the writer’s argument. When you hear
classmates, co-workers, or political candidates talking about economics, you will be able to distinguish
between common sense and nonsense. You will find new ways of thinking about current events and about
personal and business decisions, as well as current events and politics.
The study of economics does not dictate the answers, but it can illuminate the different choices.
1.2 | Microeconomics and Macroeconomics
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe microeconomics
• Describe macroeconomics
• Contrast monetary policy and fiscal policy
Economics is concerned with the well-being of all people, including those with jobs and those without jobs, as well as
those with high incomes and those with low incomes. Economics acknowledges that production of useful goods and
services can create problems of environmental pollution. It explores the question of how investing in education helps
to develop workers’ skills. It probes questions like how to tell when big businesses or big labor unions are operating in
a way that benefits society as a whole and when they are operating in a way that benefits their owners or members at
the expense of others. It looks at how government spending, taxes, and regulations affect decisions about production
and consumption.
It should be clear by now that economics covers considerable ground. We can divide that ground into two parts:
Microeconomics focuses on the actions of individual agents within the economy, like households, workers, and
businesses. Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole. It focuses on broad issues such as growth of
production, the number of unemployed people, the inflationary increase in prices, government deficits, and levels
of exports and imports. Microeconomics and macroeconomics are not separate subjects, but rather complementary
perspectives on the overall subject of the economy.
14
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col23729/1.3

To understand why both microeconomic and macroeconomic perspectives are useful, consider the problem of
studying a biological ecosystem like a lake. One person who sets out to study the lake might focus on specific topics:
certain kinds of algae or plant life; the characteristics of particular fish or snails; or the trees surrounding the lake.
Another person might take an overall view and instead consider the lake's ecosystem from top to bottom; what eats
what, how the system stays in a rough balance, and what environmental stresses affect this balance. Both approaches
are useful, and both examine the same lake, but the viewpoints are different. In a similar way, both microeconomics
and macroeconomics study the same economy, but each has a different viewpoint.
Whether you are scrutinizing lakes or economics, the micro and the macro insights should blend with each other.
In studying a lake, the micro insights about particular plants and animals help to understand the overall food chain,
while the macro insights about the overall food chain help to explain the environment in which individual plants and
animals live.
In economics, the micro decisions of individual businesses are influenced by whether the macroeconomy is healthy.
For example, firms will be more likely to hire workers if the overall economy is growing. In turn, macroeconomy's
performance ultimately depends on the microeconomic decisions that individual households and businesses make.
Microeconomics
What determines how households and individuals spend their budgets? What combination of goods and services will
best fit their needs and wants, given the budget they have to spend? How do people decide whether to work, and if
so, whether to work full time or part time? How do people decide how much to save for the future, or whether they
should borrow to spend beyond their current means?
What determines the products, and how many of each, a firm will produce and sell? What determines the prices a
firm will charge? What determines how a firm will produce its products? What determines how many workers it
will hire? How will a firm finance its business? When will a firm decide to expand, downsize, or even close? In the
microeconomics part of this book, we will learn about the theory of consumer behavior, the theory of the firm, how
markets for labor and other resources work, and how markets sometimes fail to work properly.
Macroeconomics
What determines the level of economic activity in a society? In other words, what determines how many goods and
services a nation actually produces? What determines how many jobs are available in an economy? What determines
a nation’s standard of living? What causes the economy to speed up or slow down? What causes firms to hire more
workers or to lay them off? Finally, what causes the economy to grow over the long term?
We can determine an economy's macroeconomic health by examining a number of goals: growth in the standard
of living, low unemployment, and low inflation, to name the most important. How can we use government
macroeconomic policy to pursue these goals? A nation's central bank conducts monetary policy, which involves
policies that affect bank lending, interest rates, and financial capital markets. For the United States, this is the Federal
Reserve. A nation's legislative body determines fiscal policy, which involves government spending and taxes. For
the United States, this is the Congress and the executive branch, which originates the federal budget. These are
the government's main tools. Americans tend to expect that government can fix whatever economic problems we
encounter, but to what extent is that expectation realistic? These are just some of the issues that we will explore in the
macroeconomic chapters of this book.
1.3 | How Economists Use Theories and Models to
Understand Economic Issues
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Interpret a circular flow diagram
• Explain the importance of economic theories and models
• Describe goods and services markets and labor markets
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
15

Figure 1.5 John Maynard Keynes One of the most influential economists in modern times was John Maynard
Keynes. (Credit: Wikimedia Commons)
John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), one of the greatest economists of the twentieth century, pointed out that
economics is not just a subject area but also a way of thinking. Keynes (Figure 1.5) famously wrote in the
introduction to a fellow economist’s book: “[Economics] is a method rather than a doctrine, an apparatus of the mind,
a technique of thinking, which helps its possessor to draw correct conclusions.” In other words, economics teaches
you how to think, not what to think.
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/Keynes) about John Maynard Keynes and his influence on economics.
Economists see the world through a different lens than anthropologists, biologists, classicists, or practitioners of any
other discipline. They analyze issues and problems using economic theories that are based on particular assumptions
about human behavior. These assumptions tend to be different than the assumptions an anthropologist or psychologist
might use. A theory is a simplified representation of how two or more variables interact with each other. The purpose
of a theory is to take a complex, real-world issue and simplify it down to its essentials. If done well, this enables
the analyst to understand the issue and any problems around it. A good theory is simple enough to understand, while
complex enough to capture the key features of the object or situation you are studying.
Sometimes economists use the term model instead of theory. Strictly speaking, a theory is a more abstract
representation, while a model is a more applied or empirical representation. We use models to test theories, but for
this course we will use the terms interchangeably.
For example, an architect who is planning a major office building will often build a physical model that sits on a
tabletop to show how the entire city block will look after the new building is constructed. Companies often build
models of their new products, which are more rough and unfinished than the final product, but can still demonstrate
how the new product will work.
A good model to start with in economics is the circular flow diagram (Figure 1.6). It pictures the economy as
consisting of two groups—households and firms—that interact in two markets: the goods and services market in
which firms sell and households buy and the labor market in which households sell labor to business firms or other
employees.
16
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col23729/1.3

Figure 1.6 The Circular Flow Diagram The circular flow diagram shows how households and firms interact in the
goods and services market, and in the labor market. The direction of the arrows shows that in the goods and services
market, households receive goods and services and pay firms for them. In the labor market, households provide labor
and receive payment from firms through wages, salaries, and benefits.
Firms produce and sell goods and services to households in the market for goods and services (or product market).
Arrow “A” indicates this. Households pay for goods and services, which becomes the revenues to firms. Arrow “B”
indicates this. Arrows A and B represent the two sides of the product market. Where do households obtain the income
to buy goods and services? They provide the labor and other resources (e.g. land, capital, raw materials) firms need
to produce goods and services in the market for inputs (or factors of production). Arrow “C” indicates this. In return,
firms pay for the inputs (or resources) they use in the form of wages and other factor payments. Arrow “D” indicates
this. Arrows “C” and “D” represent the two sides of the factor market.
Of course, in the real world, there are many different markets for goods and services and markets for many different
types of labor. The circular flow diagram simplifies this to make the picture easier to grasp. In the diagram, firms
produce goods and services, which they sell to households in return for revenues. The outer circle shows this, and
represents the two sides of the product market (for example, the market for goods and services) in which households
demand and firms supply. Households sell their labor as workers to firms in return for wages, salaries, and benefits.
The inner circle shows this and represents the two sides of the labor market in which households supply and firms
demand.
This version of the circular flow model is stripped down to the essentials, but it has enough features to explain how
the product and labor markets work in the economy. We could easily add details to this basic model if we wanted to
introduce more real-world elements, like financial markets, governments, and interactions with the rest of the globe
(imports and exports).
Economists carry a set of theories in their heads like a carpenter carries around a toolkit. When they see an economic
issue or problem, they go through the theories they know to see if they can find one that fits. Then they use the
theory to derive insights about the issue or problem. Economists express theories as diagrams, graphs, or even as
mathematical equations. (Do not worry. In this course, we will mostly use graphs.) Economists do not figure out the
answer to the problem first and then draw the graph to illustrate. Rather, they use the graph of the theory to help
them figure out the answer. Although at the introductory level, you can sometimes figure out the right answer without
applying a model, if you keep studying economics, before too long you will run into issues and problems that you
will need to graph to solve. We explain both micro and macroeconomics in terms of theories and models. The most
well-known theories are probably those of supply and demand, but you will learn a number of others.
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
17

1.4 | How To Organize Economies: An Overview of
Economic Systems
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Contrast traditional economies, command economies, and market economies
• Explain gross domestic product (GDP)
• Assess the importance and effects of globalization
Think about what a complex system a modern economy is. It includes all production of goods and services, all buying
and selling, all employment. The economic life of every individual is interrelated, at least to a small extent, with the
economic lives of thousands or even millions of other individuals. Who organizes and coordinates this system? Who
insures that, for example, the number of televisions a society provides is the same as the amount it needs and wants?
Who insures that the right number of employees work in the electronics industry? Who insures that televisions are
produced in the best way possible? How does it all get done?
There are at least three ways that societies organize an economy. The first is the traditional economy, which is the
oldest economic system and is used in parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. Traditional economies organize their
economic affairs the way they have always done (i.e., tradition). Occupations stay in the family. Most families are
farmers who grow the crops using traditional methods. What you produce is what you consume. Because tradition
drives the way of life, there is little economic progress or development.
Figure 1.7 A Command Economy Ancient Egypt was an example of a command economy. (Credit: Jay Bergesen/
Flickr Creative Commons)
Command economies are very different. In a command economy, economic effort is devoted to goals passed down
from a ruler or ruling class. Ancient Egypt was a good example: a large part of economic life was devoted to building
pyramids, like those in Figure 1.7, for the pharaohs. Medieval manor life is another example: the lord provided the
land for growing crops and protection in the event of war. In return, vassals provided labor and soldiers to do the
lord’s bidding. In the last century, communism emphasized command economies.
In a command economy, the government decides what goods and services will be produced and what prices it will
charge for them. The government decides what methods of production to use and sets wages for workers. The
government provides many necessities like healthcare and education for free. Currently, Cuba and North Korea have
command economies.
18
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col23729/1.3

Figure 1.8 A Market Economy Nothing says “market” more than The New York Stock Exchange. (Credit: Erik Drost/
Flickr Creative Commons)
Although command economies have a very centralized structure for economic decisions, market economies have a
very decentralized structure. A market is an institution that brings together buyers and sellers of goods or services,
who may be either individuals or businesses. The New York Stock Exchange (Figure 1.8) is a prime example of
a market which brings buyers and sellers together. In a market economy, decision-making is decentralized. Market
economies are based on private enterprise: the private individuals or groups of private individuals own and operate
the means of production (resources and businesses). Businesses supply goods and services based on demand. (In
a command economy, by contrast, the government owns resources and businesses.) Supply of goods and services
depends on what the demands. A person’s income is based on his or her ability to convert resources (especially labor)
into something that society values. The more society values the person’s output, the higher the income (think Lady
Gaga or LeBron James). In this scenario, market forces, not governments, determine economic decisions.
Most economies in the real world are mixed. They combine elements of command and market (and even traditional)
systems. The U.S. economy is positioned toward the market-oriented end of the spectrum. Many countries in Europe
and Latin America, while primarily market-oriented, have a greater degree of government involvement in economic
decisions than the U.S. economy. China and Russia, while over the past several decades have moved more in the
direction of having a market-oriented system, remain closer to the command economy end of the spectrum. The
Heritage Foundation provides information about how free and thus market-oriented different countries' are, as the
following Clear It Up feature discusses. For a similar ranking, but one that defines freedom more broadly, see the
Cato Foundation's Human Freedom Index (https://openstax.org/l/cato) .
What countries are considered economically free?
Who is in control of economic decisions? Are people free to do what they want and to work where they want?
Are businesses free to produce when they want and what they choose, and to hire and fire as they wish?
Are banks free to choose who will receive loans, or does the government control these kinds of choices?
Each year, researchers at the Heritage Foundation and the Wall Street Journal look at 50 different categories
of economic freedom for countries around the world. They give each nation a score based on the extent of
economic freedom in each category.
The 2016 Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom report ranked 178 countries around the world:
Table 1.1 lists some examples of the most free and the least free countries. Several additional countries were
not ranked because of extreme instability that made judgments about economic freedom impossible. These
countries include Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria, Somalia, and Yemen.
The assigned rankings are inevitably based on estimates, yet even these rough measures can be useful
for discerning trends. In 2015, 101 of the 178 included countries shifted toward greater economic freedom,
although 77 of the countries shifted toward less economic freedom. In recent decades, the overall trend has
been a higher level of economic freedom around the world.
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
19

Most Economic Freedom
Least Economic Freedom
1. Hong Kong
167. Timor-Leste
2. Singapore
168. Democratic Republic of Congo
3. New Zealand
169. Argentina
4. Switzerland
170. Equatorial Guinea
5. Australia
171. Iran
6. Canada
172. Republic of Congo
7. Chile
173. Eritrea
8. Ireland
174. Turkmenistan
9. Estonia
175. Zimbabwe
10. United Kingdom
176. Venezuela
11. United States
177. Cuba
12. Denmark
178. North Korea
Table 1.1 Economic Freedoms, 2016
(Source: The Heritage Foundation, 2016 Index of
Economic Freedom, Country Rankings, http://www.heritage.org/index/ranking)
Regulations: The Rules of the Game
Markets and government regulations are always entangled. There is no such thing as an absolutely free market.
Regulations always define the “rules of the game” in the economy. Economies that are primarily market-oriented
have fewer regulations—ideally just enough to maintain an even playing field for participants. At a minimum, these
laws govern matters like safeguarding private property against theft, protecting people from violence, enforcing legal
contracts, preventing fraud, and collecting taxes. Conversely, even the most command-oriented economies operate
using markets. How else would buying and selling occur? The government heavily regulates decisions of what to
produce and prices to charge. Heavily regulated economies often have underground economies (or black markets),
which are markets where the buyers and sellers make transactions without the government’s approval.
The question of how to organize economic institutions is typically not a black-or-white choice between all market
or all government, but instead involves a balancing act over the appropriate combination of market freedom and
government rules.

his OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col23729/1.3

Figure 1.9 Globalization Cargo ships are one mode of transportation for shipping goods in the global economy.
(Credit: Raul Valdez/Flickr Creative Commons)
The Rise of Globalization
Recent decades have seen a trend toward globalization, which is the expanding cultural, political, and economic
connections between people around the world. One measure of this is the increased buying and selling of goods,
services, and assets across national borders—in other words, international trade and financial capital flows.
Globalization has occurred for a number of reasons. Improvements in shipping, as illustrated by the container ship in
Figure 1.9, and air cargo have driven down transportation costs. Innovations in computing and telecommunications
have made it easier and cheaper to manage long-distance economic connections of production and sales. Many
valuable products and services in the modern economy can take the form of information—for example: computer
software; financial advice; travel planning; music, books and movies; and blueprints for designing a building. These
products and many others can be transported over telephones and computer networks at ever-lower costs. Finally,
international agreements and treaties between countries have encouraged greater trade.
Table 1.2 presents one measure of globalization. It shows the percentage of domestic economic production that was
exported for a selection of countries from 2010 to 2015, according to an entity known as The World Bank. Exports are
the goods and services that one produces domestically and sells abroad. Imports are the goods and services that one
produces abroad and then sells domestically. Gross domestic product (GDP) measures the size of total production in
an economy. Thus, the ratio of exports divided by GDP measures what share of a country’s total economic production
is sold in other countries.

In recent decades, the export/GDP ratio has generally risen, both worldwide and for the U.S. economy. Interestingly,
the share of U.S. exports in proportion to the U.S. economy is well below the global average, in part because large
economies like the United States can contain more of the division of labor inside their national borders. However,
smaller economies like Belgium, Korea, and Canada need to trade across their borders with other countries to take
full advantage of division of labor, specialization, and economies of scale. In this sense, the enormous U.S. economy
is less affected by globalization than most other countries.
Table 1.2 indicates that many medium and low income countries around the world, like Mexico and China, have also
experienced a surge of globalization in recent decades. If an astronaut in orbit could put on special glasses that make
all economic transactions visible as brightly colored lines and look down at Earth, the astronaut would see the planet
covered with connections.
Despite the rise in globalization over the last few decades, in recent years we've seen significant pushback against
globalization from people across the world concerned about loss of jobs, loss of political sovereignty, and increased
economic inequality. Prominent examples of this pushback include the 2016 vote in Great Britain to exit the European
Union (i.e. Brexit), and the election of Donald J. Trump for President of the United States.
Hopefully, you now have an idea about economics. Before you move to any other chapter of study, be sure to read
the very important appendix to this chapter called The Use of Mathematics in Principles of Economics. It is
essential that you learn more about how to read and use models in economics.
Decisions ... Decisions in the Social Media Age
The world we live in today provides nearly instant access to a wealth of information. Consider that as
recently as the late 1970s, the Farmer’s Almanac, along with the Weather Bureau of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, were the primary sources American farmers used to determine when to plant and harvest their
crops. Today, farmers are more likely to access, online, weather forecasts from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration or watch the Weather Channel. After all, knowing the upcoming forecast could
drive when to harvest crops. Consequently, knowing the upcoming weather could change the amount of crop
harvested.
Some relatively new information forums, such as Facebook, are rapidly changing how information is
distributed; hence, influencing decision making. In 2014, the Pew Research Center reported that 71% of online
adults use Facebook. This social media forum posts topics ranging from the National Basketball Association,
to celebrity singers and performers, to farmers.
Information helps us make decisions as simple as what to wear today to how many reporters the media should
send to cover a crash. Each of these decisions is an economic decision. After all, resources are scarce. If the
media send ten reporters to cover an accident, they are not available to cover other stories or complete other
tasks. Information provides the necessary knowledge to make the best possible decisions on how to utilize
scarce resources. Welcome to the world of economics!
22
Chapter 1 | Welcome to Economics!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col23729/1.3

circular flow diagram
command economy
division of labor
economics
economies of scale
exports
fiscal policy
globalization
goods and services market
gross domestic product (GDP)
imports
labor market
macroeconomics
market
market economy
microeconomics
model
monetary policy
private enterprise
scarcity
specialization
theory
traditional economy
underground economy
KEY TERMS
a diagram that views the economy as consisting of households and firms interacting in a goods
and services market and a labor market
an economy where economic decisions are passed down from government authority and where
the government owns the resources
the way in which different workers divide required tasks to produce a good or service
the study of how humans make choices under conditions of scarcity
when the average cost of producing each individual unit declines as total output increases
products (goods and services) made domestically and sold abroad
economic policies that involve government spending and taxes
the trend in which buying and selling in markets have increasingly crossed national borders
a market in which firms are sellers of what they produce and households are buyers
measure of the size of total production in an economy
products (goods and services) made abroad and then sold domestically
the market in which households sell their labor as workers to business firms or other employers
the branch of economics that focuses on broad issues such as growth, unemployment, inflation, and
trade balance
interaction between potential buyers and sellers; a combination of demand and supply
an economy where economic decisions are decentralized, private individuals own resources, and
businesses supply goods and services based on demand
the branch of economics that focuses on actions of particular agents within the economy, like
households, workers, and business firms
see theory
policy that involves altering the level of interest rates, the availability of credit in the economy, and
the extent of borrowing
system where private individuals or groups of private individuals own and operate the means of
production (resources and businesses)
when human wants for goods and services exceed the available supply
when workers or firms focus on particular tasks for which they are well-suited within the overall
production process
a representation of an object or situation that is simplified while including enough of the key features to help us
understand the object or situation
typically an agricultural economy where things are done the same as they have always been done
a market where the buyers and sellers make transactions in violation of one or more