
Reflecting the Full Diversity of Human Understanding
A multicultural and global perspective is a central organizing principle of Introduction to Philosophy. This text
explores Eastern, African, and Indigenous perspectives in concert with and, in some cases, in juxtaposition to
classical Western thinkers. Additionally, the authors have made a special effort to highlight the philosophical
work of women, who have made important contributions to the history of philosophy in numerous traditions.
This broader emphasis introduces students to approaches that open up traditional philosophical questions in
provocative ways, offering fresh possibilities for social and individual understanding. As just one example,
alongside discussion of the individualistic ways that Hume and Locke attempted to answer the question “what
is the self” appears discussion of the African concept of ubuntu, sometimes translated as “a person is a person
through other persons.” Discussions of the four noble truths of Buddhism as a path to achieve liberation from
suffering, the four interrelated concepts at the heart of Mohist ethical theory, and Carol Gilligan’s care ethics
are other examples of well-established answers to deep philosophical questions that provide fresh additions to
classical Western ways of thinking.
Providing Students with Transferable Skills
Introduction to Philosophy is intentionally organized to develop critical thinking, research, reading, and
writing skills. There is an entire chapter devoted to these transferrable skills associated with philosophy.
Another chapter addresses logic and reasoning. Additionally, interspersed throughout the text are features
providing guidance on how to read philosophy effectively, how to conduct research and evaluate sources, and
how to write philosophy papers. These features aim to be very explicit about the habits and practices that
enable one to be a good student of philosophy and, by extension, a good critical thinker.
Reminding Readers that Philosophy Is a Living Discipline
Calling attention to the fact that philosophy is not just a feature of our human past, Introduction to Philosophy
discusses the ways contemporary academic philosophers address some of our most pressing ethical and
moral issues. Examples include discussions of bioethics, emerging issues surrounding genetic engineering
and communication technologies, what brain science can and cannot tell us about human consciousness, and
morality pertaining to human treatment of the natural world. Through discussion of these topics and others,
readers will gain awareness of the range of answers that contemporary philosophers offer to current issues
and learn to appreciate the type of reasoning that philosophers use. Throughout the text, students are also
encouraged to critically reflect on philosophical points of view and develop their own philosophical positions.
Enriching and Engaging Features
“Doing” Philosophy
While there is certainly not one method of “doing” philosophy, there are practices and habits that make
someone a better reader, writer, researcher, and thinker in philosophy. A set of recurring features makes these
skills explicit and concrete, with guidance geared toward the introductory student.
•
Think Like a Philosopher. These features adopt one of two approaches. Some instances prompt students
to engage with concepts key to philosophical argument, and thus to critical thinking, either in the form of
interactive online exercises or as written guidance. Others guide students in formulating their own
approaches to philosophical questions.
•
Write Like a Philosopher. These features challenge the reader to articulate their own written responses to
philosophical prompts or to craft their own philosophical arguments. Clear guidance is given on both the
considerations that should appear in the response and the most effective structure for written
philosophical discourse.
•
Read Like a Philosopher. These features prompt students to engage with portions of key primary texts,
such as Plato’s Apology or the Daodejing. Clear structure is provided, guiding the reader on what elements
of the text to pay close attention to and what questions they should hold in their minds while reading.
2
Preface
Access for free at openstax.org

“How It All Hangs Together”
Philosophy is an inherently interconnected undertaking that speaks to universal human concerns. The broad
questions philosophers ask (e.g., what makes a good life, how does one define morality, how should people
treat one another, what rights should be accorded individuals within society) touch many aspects of our social
and individual existences. A number of features address the interconnectedness of philosophical inquiry and
philosophical thought, as well as its relevance to all lives.
•
Connections features. Throughout the text, callouts direct students to additional coverage of both
important theories and key thinkers in other chapters.
•
Videos. Video features provide supplemental information from trusted contemporary sources, such as the
BBC Radio 4 series A History of Ideas and the e-series Wi-Phi Philosophy.
•
Podcasts. Podcast links are provided from engaging series, such as The History of Philosophy without Any
Gaps and Philosophy Bites.
Pedagogical Framework
An effective pedagogical framework helps students structure their learning and retain information.
•
Chapter Outlines. Each chapter opens with an outline and introduction, familiarizing students with the
material that will follow. Throughout the chapter, material is chunked into manageable sections of content
within each of the larger main heads.
•
Learning Objectives. Every main section begins with two to five clear, concise, and measurable learning
objectives, tagged to Bloom’s levels. These objectives are designed to help the instructor decide what
content to include or assign and to guide student expectations. After completing the textual sections and
end-of-chapter exercises, students should be able to demonstrate mastery of the learning objectives.
•
Chapter Summaries. Organized by section heads, chapter summaries distill the information presented in
each chapter to key, concise points.
•
Key Terms. Key terms are bolded and followed by in-text definitions. A glossary of key terms also appears
at the end of each chapter.
•
Critical Thinking Questions. Each chapter ends with 10 to 20 critical thinking questions, also organized
by section head. Some of these questions assess recall of key concepts, while others ask students to think,
read, and write like a philosopher. These more complex questions might prompt students to formulate
thoughtful critiques of existing philosophical positions or to begin to articulate their own thoughts on
philosophical questions. Any of these components can be used by instructors to build assessments and
assignments for their courses.
•
“Further Reading” Suggestions. Each chapter ends with suggested resources for students who wish to
dive deeper into the thinkers and thoughts discussed in the chapters.
Preface
3

About the Authors
Senior Contributing Author
4
Preface
Nathan Smith, Houston Community College
Nathan Smith has a PhD in philosophy from Boston College and the University of Paris, Sorbonne. His 
dissertation was on René Descartes’s early scientific and mathematical work. He has been a full-time 
instructor of philosophy at Houston Community College (HCC) since 2008. He has published on Descartes, 
phenomenology, and topics in Open Educational Resources (OER), including chapter contributions to an OER 
textbook through the Rebus Foundation. At HCC, he served as Chair of the Philosophy, Humanities, and Library 
Sciences Department from 2015 to 2017 and has served as the Open Educational Resources Coordinator since 
2017. In this capacity he has secured and managed over $500,000 in grants for the institution and leads a 
cross-disciplinary, district-wide effort to provide “zero cost books” courses and degree plans for students.
Contributing Authors
Gregory Browne, Eastern Michigan University
Parish Conkling, Houston Community College
Naomi Friedman, University of North Carolina, Asheville
Allison Fritz, Chadron State College
Daniel Garro, Rider University
Jeremy Gallegos, Friends University
Jon Gill, Gustavus Adolphus College
Gayle Horton, Santa Fe College
Maryellen Lo Bosco, Suffolk Community College
Rebecca A. Longtin, State University of New York, New Paltz
Corey McCall, The Cornell Prison Education Program
Kurt Stuke, New England College
Reviewers
Gregory Browne, Eastern Michigan University
Jason Castonzo, Indian River State College
Amy Cedrone, Harford Community College
Parish Conkling, Houston Community College
Caitlin Dolan, San Francisco State University
Katrina Elliott, University of California, Los Angeles
Shane Gronholz, Gonzaga University
Kyle Hirsch, Community College of Aurora
Access for free at openstax.org

Catherine Homan, Mount Mary University
Jason Jenson, Houston Community College
Andrew Law, University of Southern California
Jeremy Proulx, Eastern Michigan University
Valérie Racine, Western New England University
Ellyn Ritterskamp, University of North Carolina, Charlotte
Jessica Roisen, Saint Ambrose University
Kris Sealey, Fairfield University
Gregory Stoutenburg, York College of Pennsylvania
Adam Thompson, University of Nebraska, Lincoln
Drew Thompson, Loyola University
Antione Tomlin, Anne Arundel Community College
Mike VanQuickenborne, Everett Community College
Steve Wyre, American Public University
Jongbok Yi, Stockton University
Additional Resources
Student and Instructor Resources
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including an instructor’s manual, test
bank, and lecture slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which you can apply for
when you log in or create your account on OpenStax.org. Take advantage of these resources to supplement
Introduction to Philosophy.
•
Comprehensive Instructor’s Manual. Designed to provide maximum guidance for delivering content in
an interesting and dynamic manner, each chapter of the instructor’s manual includes an in-depth lecture
outline, a key terms list, a set of “questions for further thought,” and a list of recommended resources for
further reading and exploration. Authored by Kyle Hirsh, Community College of Aurora.
•
Test Bank. With 500 true/false and multiple-choice questions in our test bank, instructors can customize
tests to support a variety of course objectives. The test bank is available in Word format. Authored by Steve
Wyre, American Public University.
•
PowerPoint Lecture Slides. The PowerPoint slides provide outlines, images, and an overview of chapter
topics as a starting place for instructors to build their lectures. Authored by Gregory Browne, Eastern
Michigan University.
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity builds trust, understanding, equity, and genuine learning. While students may encounter
significant challenges in their courses and their lives, doing their own work and maintaining a high degree of
authenticity will result in meaningful outcomes that will extend far beyond their college career. Faculty,
administrators, resource providers, and students should work together to maintain a fair and positive
experience.
We realize that students benefit when academic integrity ground rules are established early in the course. To
that end, OpenStax has created an interactive to aid with academic integrity discussions in your course.
Preface
5

Visit our academic integrity slider (https://view.genial.ly/61e08a7af6db870d591078c1/interactive-image-
defining-academic-integrity-interactive-slider). Click and drag icons along the continuum to align these
practices with your institution and course policies.You may then include the graphic on your syllabus, present
it in your first course meeting, or create a handout for students.
At OpenStax we are also developing resources supporting authentic learning experiences and assessment.
Please visit this book’s page for updates. For an in-depth review of academic integrity strategies, we highly
recommend visiting the International Center of Academic Integrity (ICAI) website at
https://academicintegrity.org/.
Community Hubs
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons—a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.
Technology Partners
As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
page on OpenStax.org.
6
Preface
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 1.1 Philosophy begins with dialogue—with friends, with yourself, with other philosophers, and with the
past. (credit: “Conversations Time moves slowly when talking with old friends” by Sagar/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1 What Is Philosophy?
1.2 How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
1.3 Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
1.4 An Overview of Contemporary Philosophy
For most college students, an Introduction to Philosophy course is their first encounter with
the study of philosophy. Unlike most of your other courses, philosophy is not something usually covered in
high school. Yet you are probably familiar with the term philosophy and may have some preconceived notion
about what philosophy is and what philosophers do. Perhaps you have stayed up late at night talking with
friends or family about topics like free will or the existence of God. Maybe you have a friend who always talks
about big ideas or asks tough questions that sound like riddles. Perhaps you think of them as “philosophical”;
you might be right.
In this chapter, we will provide a brief introduction to the field of philosophy as a historical and academic
discipline. This first chapter should prepare you for your philosophy course and give you a better idea of what
it means to be a philosopher. As with all introductions, this one is just a start. Your job is to explore more, think
more, read more, and write more like a philosopher. Soon you may even find that you are doing philosophy.
1
Introduction to Philosophy

1.1 What Is Philosophy?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify sages (early philosophers) across historical traditions.
•
Explain the connection between ancient philosophy and the origin of the sciences.
•
Describe philosophy as a discipline that makes coherent sense of a whole.
•
Summarize the broad and diverse origins of philosophy.
It is difficult to define philosophy. In fact, to do so is itself a philosophical activity, since philosophers are
attempting to gain the broadest and most fundamental conception of the world as it exists. The world includes
nature, consciousness, morality, beauty, and social organizations. So the content available for philosophy is
both broad and deep. Because of its very nature, philosophy considers a range of subjects, and philosophers
cannot automatically rule anything out. Whereas other disciplines allow for basic assumptions, philosophers
cannot be bound by such assumptions. This open-endedness makes philosophy a somewhat awkward and
confusing subject for students. There are no easy answers to the questions of what philosophy studies or how
one does philosophy. Nevertheless, in this chapter, we can make some progress on these questions by (1)
looking at past examples of philosophers, (2) considering one compelling definition of philosophy, and (3)
looking at the way academic philosophers today actually practice philosophy.
Historical Origins of Philosophy
One way to begin to understand philosophy is to look at its history. The historical origins of philosophical
thinking and exploration vary around the globe. The word philosophy derives from ancient Greek, in which the
philosopher is a lover or pursuer (philia) of wisdom (sophia). But the earliest Greek philosophers were not
known as philosophers; they were simply known as sages. The sage tradition provides an early glimpse of
philosophical thought in action. Sages are sometimes associated with mathematical and scientific discoveries
and at other times with their political impact. What unites these figures is that they demonstrate a willingness
to be skeptical of traditions, a curiosity about the natural world and our place in it, and a commitment to
applying reason to understand nature, human nature, and society better. The overview of the sage tradition
that follows will give you a taste of philosophy’s broad ambitions as well as its focus on complex relations
between different areas of human knowledge. There are some examples of women who made contributions to
philosophy and the sage tradition in Greece, India, and China, but these were patriarchal societies that did not
provide many opportunities for women to participate in philosophical and political discussions.
The Sages of India, China, Africa, and Greece
In classical Indian philosophy and religion, sages play a central role in both religious mythology and in the
practice of passing down teaching and instruction through generations. The Seven Sages, or Saptarishi (seven
rishis in the Sanskrit language), play an important role in sanatana dharma, the eternal duties that have come
to be identified with Hinduism but that predate the establishment of the religion. The Seven Sages are partially
considered wise men and are said to be the authors of the ancient Indian texts known as the Vedas. But they
are partly mythic figures as well, who are said to have descended from the gods and whose reincarnation
marks the passing of each age of Manu (age of man or epoch of humanity). The rishis tended to live monastic
lives, and together they are thought of as the spiritual and practical forerunners of Indian gurus or teachers,
even up to today. They derive their wisdom, in part, from spiritual forces, but also from tapas, or the
meditative, ascetic, and spiritual practices they perform to gain control over their bodies and minds. The
stories of the rishis are part of the teachings that constitute spiritual and philosophical practice in
contemporary Hinduism.
Figure 1.2 depicts a scene from the Matsya Purana, where Manu, the first man whose succession marks the
prehistorical ages of Earth, sits with the Seven Sages in a boat to protect them from a mythic flood that is said
to have submerged the world. The king of serpents guides the boat, which is said to have also contained seeds,
8
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

plants, and animals saved by Manu from the flood.
FIGURE 1.2 This painting, from the late eighteenth century, depicts the first man, Manu, guiding seven sages
through floodwaters, with the aid of the king of serpents. (credit: “Manu and Saptarishi” by unknown author/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
Despite the fact that classical Indian culture is patriarchal, women figures play an important role in the earliest
writings of the Vedic tradition (the classical Indian religious and philosophical tradition). These women figures
are partly connected to the Indian conception of the fundamental forces of nature—energy, ability, strength,
effort, and power—as feminine. This aspect of God was thought to be present at the creation of the world. The
Rig Veda, the oldest Vedic writings, contains hymns that tell the story of Ghosha, a daughter of Rishi Kakshivan,
who had a debilitating skin condition (probably leprosy) but devoted herself to spiritual practices to learn how
to heal herself and eventually marry. Another woman, Maitreyi, is said to have married the Rishi Yajnavalkya
(himself a god who was cast into mortality by a rival) for the purpose of continuing her spiritual training. She
was a devoted ascetic and is said to have composed 10 of the hymns in the Rig Veda. Additionally, there is a
famous dialogue between Maitreyi and Yajnavalkya in the Upanishads (another early, foundational collection
of texts in the Vedic tradition) about attachment to material possessions, which cannot give a person
happiness, and the achievement of ultimate bliss through knowledge of the Absolute (God).
Another woman sage named Gargi also participates in a celebrated dialogue with Yajnavalkya on natural
philosophy and the fundamental elements and forces of the universe. Gargi is characterized as one of the most
knowledgeable sages on the topic, though she ultimately concedes that Yajnavalkya has greater knowledge. In
these brief episodes, these ancient Indian texts record instances of key women who attained a level of
enlightenment and learning similar to their male counterparts. Unfortunately, this early equality between the
sexes did not last. Over time Indian culture became more patriarchal, confining women to a dependent and
subservient role. Perhaps the most dramatic and cruel example of the effects of Indian patriarchy was the
ritual practice of sati, in which a widow would sometimes immolate herself, partly in recognition of the “fact”
that following the death of her husband, her current life on Earth served no further purpose (Rout 2016).
Neither a widow’s in-laws nor society recognized her value.
1.1 • What Is Philosophy?
9

In similar fashion to the Indian tradition, the sage (sheng) tradition is important for Chinese philosophy.
Confucius, one of the greatest Chinese writers, often refers to ancient sages, emphasizing their importance for
their discovery of technical skills essential to human civilization, for their role as rulers and wise leaders, and
for their wisdom. This emphasis is in alignment with the Confucian appeal to a well-ordered state under the
guidance of a “philosopher-king.” This point of view can be seen in early sage figures identified by one of the
greatest classical authors in the Chinese tradition, as the “Nest Builder” and “Fire Maker” or, in another case,
the “Flood Controller.” These names identify wise individuals with early technological discoveries. The Book of
Changes, a classical Chinese text, identifies the Five (mythic) Emperors as sages, including Yao and Shun, who
are said to have built canoes and oars, attached carts to oxen, built double gates for defense, and fashioned
bows and arrows (Cheng 1983). Emperor Shun is also said to have ruled during the time of a great flood, when
all of China was submerged. Yü is credited with having saved civilization by building canals and dams.
FIGURE 1.3 The Chinese philosopher and historian Han Feizi identified sages with technological discoveries.
(credit: “Portrait of Han Fei” by unknown author/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
These figures are praised not only for their political wisdom and long rule, but also for their filial piety and
devotion to work. For instance, Mencius, a Confucian philosopher, relates a story of Shun’s care for his blind
father and wicked stepmother, while Yü is praised for his selfless devotion to work. In these ways, the Chinese
philosophical traditions, such as Confucianism and Mohism, associate key values of their philosophical
enterprises with the great sages of their history. Whether the sages were, in fact, actual people or, as many
scholars have concluded, mythical forebearers, they possessed the essential human virtue of listening and
responding to divine voices. This attribute can be inferred from the Chinese script for sheng, which bears the
symbol of an ear as a prominent feature. So the sage is one who listens to insight from the heavens and then is
capable of sharing that wisdom or acting upon it to the benefit of his society (Cheng 1983). This idea is similar
to one found in the Indian tradition, where the most important texts, the Vedas, are known as shruti, or works
that were heard through divine revelation and only later written down.
Although Confucianism is a venerable world philosophy, it is also highly patriarchal and resulted in the
widespread subordination of women. The position of women in China began to change only after the
Communist Revolution (1945–1952). While some accounts of Confucianism characterize men and women as
10
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

emblematic of two opposing forces in the natural world, the Yin and Yang, this view of the sexes developed over
time and was not consistently applied. Chinese women did see a measure of independence and freedom with
the influence of Buddhism and Daoism, each of which had a more liberal view of the role of women (Adler
2006).
A detailed and important study of the sage tradition in Africa is provided by Henry Odera Oruka (1990), who
makes the case that prominent folk sages in African tribal history developed complex philosophical ideas.
Oruka interviewed tribal Africans identified by their communities as sages, and he recorded their sayings and
ideas, confining himself to those sayings that demonstrated “a rational method of inquiry into the real nature
of things” (Oruka 1990, 150). He recognized a tension in what made these sages philosophically interesting:
they articulated the received wisdom of their tradition and culture while at the same time maintaining a
critical distance from that culture, seeking a rational justification for the beliefs held by the culture.
CONNECTIONS
The chapter on the early history of philosophy covers this topic in greater detail.
FIGURE 1.4 Engraving of Greek historian Diogenes Laërtius from a 1688 edition of his Lives and Opinions of
Eminent Philosophers. (credit: “Diogenes Laërtius, ancient Greek writer” by Unidentified engraver/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)
Among the ancient Greeks, it is common to identify seven sages. The best-known account is provided by
Diogenes Laërtius, whose text Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers is a canonical resource on early
Greek philosophy. The first and most important sage is Thales of Miletus. Thales traveled to Egypt to study with
the Egyptian priests, where he became one of the first Greeks to learn astronomy. He is known for bringing
back to Greece knowledge of the calendar, dividing the year into 365 days, tracking the progress of the sun
from solstice to solstice, and—somewhat dramatically—predicting a solar eclipse in 585 BCE. The eclipse
occurred on the day of a battle between the Medes and Lydians. It is possible that Thales used knowledge of
Babylonian astronomical records to guess the year and location of the eclipse. This mathematical and
astronomical feat is one of Thales’s several claims to sagacity. In addition, he is said to have calculated the
1.1 • What Is Philosophy?
11

height of the pyramids using the basic geometry of similar triangles and measuring shadows at a certain time
of day. He is also reported to have predicted a particularly good year for olives: he bought up all the olive
presses and then made a fortune selling those presses to farmers wanting to turn their olives into oil. Together,
these scientific and technical achievements suggest that at least part of Thales’s wisdom can be attributed to a
very practical, scientific, and mathematical knowledge of the natural world. If that were all Thales was known
for, he might be called the first scientist or engineer. But he also made more basic claims about the nature and
composition of the universe; for instance, he claimed that all matter was fundamentally made of up water. He
also argued that everything that moved on its own possessed a soul and that the soul itself was immortal.
These claims demonstrate a concern about the fundamental nature of reality.
Another of the seven sages was Solon, a famed political leader. He introduced the “Law of Release” to Athens,
which cancelled all personal debts and freed indentured servants, or “debt-slaves” who had been consigned to
service based on a personal debt they were unable to repay. In addition, he established a constitutional
government in Athens with a representative body, a procedure for taxation, and a series of economic reforms.
He was widely admired as a political leader but voluntarily stepped down so that he would not become a tyrant.
He was finally forced to flee Athens when he was unable to persuade the members of the Assembly (the ruling
body) to resist the rising tyranny of one of his relatives, Pisistratus. When he arrived in exile, he was reportedly
asked whom he considered to be happy, to which he replied, “One ought to count no man happy until he is
dead.” Aristotle interpreted this statement to mean that happiness was not a momentary experience, but a
quality reflective of someone’s entire life.
Beginnings of Natural Philosophy
The sage tradition is a largely prehistoric tradition that provides a narrative about how intellect, wisdom, piety,
and virtue led to the innovations central to flourishing of ancient civilizations. Particularly in Greece, the sage
tradition blends into a period of natural philosophy, where ancient scientists or philosophers try to explain
nature using rational methods. Several of the early Greek schools of philosophy were centered on their
respective views of nature. Followers of Thales, known as the Milesians, were particularly interested in the
underlying causes of natural change. Why does water turn to ice? What happens when winter passes into
spring? Why does it seem like the stars and planets orbit Earth in predictable patterns? From Aristotle we
know that Thales thought there was a difference between material elements that participate in change and
elements that contain their own source of motion. This early use of the term element did not have the same
meaning as the scientific meaning of the word today in a field like chemistry. But Thales thought material
elements bear some fundamental connection to water in that they have the capacity to move and alter their
state. By contrast, other elements had their own internal source of motion, of which he cites the magnet and
amber (which exhibits forces of static electricity when rubbed against other materials). He said that these
elements have “soul.” This notion of soul, as a principle of internal motion, was influential across ancient and
medieval natural philosophy. In fact, the English language words animal and animation are derived from the
Latin word for soul (anima).
Similarly, early thinkers like Xenophanes began to formulate explanations for natural phenomena. For
instance, he explained rainbows, the sun, the moon, and St. Elmo’s fire (luminous, electrical discharges) as
apparitions of the clouds. This form of explanation, describing some apparent phenomenon as the result of an
underlying mechanism, is paradigmatic of scientific explanation even today. Parmenides, the founder of the
Eleatic school of philosophy, used logic to conclude that whatever fundamentally exists must be unchanging
because if it ever did change, then at least some aspect of it would cease to exist. But that would imply that
what exists could not exist—which seems to defy logic. Parmenides is not saying that there is no change, but
that the changes we observe are a kind of illusion. Indeed, this point of view was highly influential, not only for
Plato and Aristotle, but also for the early atomists, like Democritus, who held that all perceived qualities are
merely human conventions. Underlying all these appearances, Democritus reasoned, are only atomic,
unchanging bits of matter flowing through a void. While this ancient Greek view of atoms is quite different
from the modern model of atoms, the very idea that every observable phenomenon has a basis in underlying
12
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

pieces of matter in various configurations clearly connects modern science to the earliest Greek philosophers.
Along these lines, the Pythagoreans provide a very interesting example of a community of philosophers
engaged in understanding the natural world and how best to live in it. You may be familiar with Pythagoras
from his Pythagorean theorem, a key principle in geometry establishing a relationship between the sides of a
right-angled triangle. Specifically, the square formed by the hypotenuse (the side opposite the right angle) is
equal to the sum of the two squares formed by the remaining two sides. In the figure below, the area of the
square formed by c is equal to the sum of the areas of the squares formed by a and b. The figure represents
how Pythagoras would have conceptualized the theorem.
FIGURE 1.5 The Pythagorean Theorem describes the relationship between the sides of a right-angled triangle as
demonstrated by the ancient Greek philosopher, Pythagoras. (credit: modification of "Pythagorean right angle" by
Marianov/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
The Pythagoreans were excellent mathematicians, but they were more interested in how mathematics
explained the natural world. In particular, Pythagoras recognized relationships between line segments and
shapes, such as the Pythagorean theorem describes, but also between numbers and sounds, by virtue of
harmonics and the intervals between notes. Similar regularities can be found in astronomy. As a result,
Pythagoras reasoned that all of nature is generated according to mathematical regularities. This view led the
Pythagoreans to believe that there was a unified, rational structure to the universe, that the planets and stars
exhibit harmonic properties and may even produce music, that musical tones and harmonies could have
healing powers, that the soul is immortal and continuously reincarnated, and that animals possess souls that
ought to be respected and valued. As a result, the Pythagorean community was defined by serious scholarship
as well as strict rules about diet, clothing, and behavior.
Additionally, in the early Pythagorean communities, it was possible for women to participate and contribute to
philosophical thought and discovery. Pythagoras himself was said to have been inspired to study philosophy by
the Delphic priestess Themistoclea. His wife Theano is credited with contributing to important discoveries in
the realms of numbers and optics. She is said to have written a treatise, On Piety, which further applies
Pythagorean philosophy to various aspects of practical life (Waithe 1987). Myia, the daughter of this illustrious
couple, was also an active and productive part of the community. At least one of her letters has survived in
which she discusses the application of Pythagorean philosophy to motherhood. The Pythagorean school is an
example of how early philosophical and scientific thinking combines with religious, cultural, and ethical
beliefs and practices to embrace many different aspects of life.
How It All Hangs Together
Closer to the present day, in 1962, Wilfrid Sellars, a highly influential 20th-century American philosopher,
wrote a chapter called “Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man” in Frontiers of Science and Philosophy. He
opens the essay with a dramatic and concise description of philosophy: “The aim of philosophy, abstractly
formulated, is to understand how things in the broadest possible sense of the term hang together in the
1.1 • What Is Philosophy?
13

broadest possible sense of the term.” If we spend some time trying to understand what Sellars means by this
definition, we will be in a better position to understand the academic discipline of philosophy. First, Sellars
emphasizes that philosophy’s goal is to understand a very wide range of topics—in fact, the widest possible
range. That is to say, philosophers are committed to understanding everything insofar as it can be understood.
This is important because it means that, on principle, philosophers cannot rule out any topic of study.
However, for a philosopher not every topic of study deserves equal attention. Some things, like conspiracy
theories or paranoid delusions, are not worth studying because they are not real. It may be worth
understanding why some people are prone to paranoid delusions or conspiratorial thinking, but the content of
these ideas is not worth investigating. Other things may be factually true, such as the daily change in number
of the grains of sand on a particular stretch of beach, but they are not worth studying because knowing that
information will not teach us about how things hang together. So a philosopher chooses to study things that are
informative and interesting—things that provide a better understanding of the world and our place in it.
To make judgments about which areas are interesting or worthy of study, philosophers need to cultivate a
special skill. Sellars describes this philosophical skill as a kind of know-how (a practical, engaged type of
knowledge, similar to riding a bike or learning to swim). Philosophical know-how, Sellars says, has to do with
knowing your way around the world of concepts and being able to understand and think about how concepts
connect, link up, support, and rely upon one another—in short, how things hang together. Knowing one’s way
around the world of concepts also involves knowing where to look to find interesting discoveries and which
places to avoid, much like a good fisherman knows where to cast his line. Sellars acknowledges that other
academics and scientists know their way around the concepts in their field of study much like philosophers do.
The difference is that these other inquirers confine themselves to a specific field of study or a particular
subject matter, while philosophers want to understand the whole. Sellars thinks that this philosophical skill is
most clearly demonstrated when we try to understand the connection between the natural world as we
experience it directly (the “manifest image”) and the natural world as science explains it (the “scientific
image”). He suggests that we gain an understanding of the nature of philosophy by trying to reconcile these two
pictures of the world that most people understand independently.
“Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man”
This essay, “Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man (https://openstax.org/r/psim)” by Wilfrid Sellars, has been
republished several times and can be found online. Read through the essay with particular focus on the first section.
Consider the following study questions:
•
What is the difference between knowing how and knowing that? Are these concepts always distinct? What does
it mean for philosophical knowledge to be a kind of know-how?
•
What do you think Sellars means when he says that philosophers “have turned other special subject-matters to
non-philosophers over the past 2500 years”?
•
Sellars describes philosophy as “bringing a picture into focus,” but he is also careful to recognize challenges
with this metaphor as it relates to the body of human knowledge. What are those challenges? Why is it difficult
to imagine all of human knowledge as a picture or image?
•
What is the scientific image of man in the world? What is the manifest image of man in the world? How are they
different? And why are these two images the primary images that need to be brought into focus so that
philosophy may have an eye on the whole?
Unlike other subjects that have clearly defined subject matter boundaries and relatively clear methods of
exploration and analysis, philosophy intentionally lacks clear boundaries or methods. For instance, your
biology textbook will tell you that biology is the “science of life.” The boundaries of biology are fairly clear: it is
an experimental science that studies living things and the associated material necessary for life. Similarly,
READ LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
14
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

biology has relatively well-defined methods. Biologists, like other experimental scientists, broadly follow
something called the “scientific method.” This is a bit of a misnomer, unfortunately, because there is no single
method that all the experimental sciences follow. Nevertheless, biologists have a range of methods and
practices, including observation, experimentation, and theory comparison and analysis, that are fairly well
established and well known among practitioners. Philosophy doesn’t have such easy prescriptions—and for
good reason. Philosophers are interested in gaining the broadest possible understanding of things, whether
that be nature, what is possible, morals, aesthetics, political organizations, or any other field or concept.
1.2 How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify philosophical methods of inquiry.
•
Explain the role of logical consequences in assessing a philosophical position.
•
Define conceptual analysis, coherence, argument, intuition, and experimental philosophy.
•
Explain the importance of trade-offs in establishing a philosophical position.
We have seen some examples of how philosophy emerged in antiquity, its relationship to natural philosophy
and modern science, and one goal of philosophy, specifically—to provide a coherent story of how the world as it
appears to us can be explained in a way that also makes sense of what the sciences tells us. In this section, we
describe in greater detail the specific strategies and tools that philosophers use to arrive at truth.
Sources of Evidence
Even though philosophy is not an empirical science, philosophical claims require evidence, and philosophers
ought to have reasons for the claims they make. There are many different types of philosophical evidence,
some of which follow.
History
A basic but underappreciated source of evidence in philosophy is the history of philosophy. As we have already
seen, philosophical thinking has its origins around the world, from the beginning of recorded history.
Historical philosophers, sages, natural philosophers, and religious thinkers are often a source of insight,
inspiration, and argument that can help us understand contemporary philosophical questions. For instance,
the Greeks recognized early on that there is a difference between the way we use language to talk about things,
with generic terms that apply to many different things at the same time (like cat, tree, or house), and the things
as they actually exist—namely, as specific, individual beings or objects. Philosophers ask, what is the
relationship between the general terms we use and the specific things that exist in the world? This sort of
question is a perennial philosophical question. Today’s philosophers have their own response to this sort of
question, and their answers often respond to and are informed by the historical treatment of these issues.
1.2 • How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
15

FIGURE 1.6 European philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau influenced the framing of the United States
Constitution. (credit: “Jean Jacques Rousseau. Né en Genêve en 1708 (https://openstax.org/r/digitalcollections)” by
Maurice Quentin de La Tour/New York Public Library)
While you may expect questions about the natural world to change over time (and certainly they have changed
due to scientific progress), questions of morality and social organization do not change as much. What
constitutes the good life? How should communities be organized to benefit all the members of that
community? These sorts of questions stay with us throughout time. In the United States, it is common for
political leaders to appeal to the “founding fathers” of the US Constitution. People like Thomas Jefferson,
Benjamin Franklin, and George Washington were heavily influenced by early modern European philosophers
like John Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Thomas Hobbes. In similar fashion, the current Chinese leader,
Xi Jinping, is fond of reading and citing the foundational philosopher Confucius. Most of Xi’s addresses include
quotations from Confucius, and Xi stresses the importance of reading classical Chinese philosophers (Zhang
2015). For Chinese political leaders, Confucius provides an important reminder of the role of virtue and a
sense of belonging among the Chinese people. There is a widespread belief among the Chinese political class
that their intellectual heritage is an important factor in their contemporary political success, in much the same
way as American political leaders trace their success back to the founding fathers. Given the influence of
philosophy on world history, it is worthwhile to engage with the writings of past philosophers to inform our
understanding of pressing philosophical questions of today.
Intuition
One of the hallmarks of philosophical thinking is an appeal to intuition. What philosophers today mean by
intuition can best be traced back to Plato, for whom intuition (nous) involved a kind of insight into the very
nature of things. This notion has had religious connotations, as if the knowledge gained through intuition is
like catching a glimpse of divine light. But intuition does not have to involve faith. René Descartes defined
intuition in the following manner: “By intuition [I mean] . . . the conception of a clear and attentive mind, which
is so easy and distinct that there can be no room for doubt about what we are understanding” (Descartes 1985,
14). This concept of intuition is clearest in mathematical examples. Importantly, it is quite different from the
way that many people use the word intuition today to mean something like “gut feeling” or “hunch.” When
philosophers talk about intuition, they mean something much more definite. Consider the equation 2 + 2 = 4.
16
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

Examine the equation in your mind. Could it possibly be false? So long as we operate under the assumption
that these numbers represent counting numbers, it seems impossible that this equation could be false. More
than that, there is a kind of clarity and certainty about the equation. It is not just that you have learned 2 + 2 = 4
by habit. You could easily perform the counting operation in your head and verify that the answer is correct.
The truth of this mathematical sentence is so clear that if it turned out to be wrong, you would have to give up
core beliefs about the nature of numbers, addition, and equality. This kind of clarity is a paradigm of intuition.
Intuition operates in other realms besides mathematics, such as in the use of language. For instance, it is
obvious that a three-legged stool has three legs or that the tallest building is taller than any other building.
These statements are true in an obvious way that is similar to the mathematical sentence above. We can
branch out further, to say, for instance, that a camel is a mammal. We might intuitively know this statement is
true, but we may also recognize that we are on slightly less certain ground. After all, whether a camel is a
mammal is based on some understanding of the anatomy of a camel as well as the biological classification
system that assigns animals to different classes. So the definition of camel as “a mammal” is not the same as “a
three-legged stool has three legs.” Here, we can see that some statements are intuitively true by virtue of their
definition. Others are intuitively true by virtue of some mental operation that we can perform very easily. Still
others are intuitively true in that they rely on a body of knowledge that is commonly accepted and foundational
for our understanding of the world.
There are many other places outside of pure linguistic analysis and mathematics where intuitions are helpful.
Consider morality: the proposition that “it is better to be good than to be bad” may seem similar to the
statement that “a three-legged stool has three legs,” but the former introduces the words good and bad, which
are fraught terms that produce disagreement among people. Nonetheless, while it may be difficult to agree on
what constitutes “good” or “bad,” everyone probably recognizes that whatever is good ought to be better than
what is bad. That seems intuitively true. On this basis, we might imagine that there are intuitive truths even in
morality. As we gain confidence in the ability of intuition to reveal truth, we might be tempted to extend
intuitions even further. However, when intuitions extend into areas where there is no consensus on what is
true, we have to be cautious. At that point, we might be using the term intuition to stand in for belief or
perspective. Such “intuitions” do not have the same force as the intuition that 2 + 2 = 4. It is not always easy to
distinguish between intuitions that are certain and evident and those that are mere feelings or hunches;
recognizing that distinction is part of the practical know-how philosophers try to develop.
Common Sense
We ought not to neglect a third source of evidence in philosophy, namely, common sense. The idea of common
sense is frequently used to describe a basic set of facts or common knowledge that any adult human being
ought to possess. But common sense is rarely defined. When philosophers talk about common sense, they
mean specific claims based on direct sense perception, which are true in a relatively fundamental sense. In
other words, philosophical champions of common sense deny that one can be skeptical of certain basic claims
of sense perception.
Famously, early-20th-century British philosopher G. E. Moore argued that a perfectly rigorous proof of the
external world could be given by simply making the appropriate gesture toward his right hand and saying,
“Here is one hand.” So long as it is granted that the sensory perception of a hand is evidence of the existence of
a hand and that there is such a thing as a hand in the external world, then it must be granted that there is an
external world. Such an argument trades on the idea that knowledge of the existence of one’s own hands is
something that does not need further proof; it is something we can know without proof. This idea is not
something that all philosophers accept, but it is, in many cases, an important source of evidence in
philosophical inquiry. At a certain point, it may be necessary to stop demanding proofs for the things we can
plainly see, such as the fact that this is a hand (as we hold a hand in front of our faces and examine it). Common
sense may be questioned by further philosophical interrogation, but the common-sense philosopher may
respond that such interrogation is either unnecessary, excessive, or misses the point.
1.2 • How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
17

Experimental Philosophy
Experimental philosophy is a relatively recent movement in philosophy by which philosophers engage in
empirical methods of investigation, similar to those used by psychologists or cognitive scientists. The basic
idea motivating experimental philosophy is that philosophers use terms and concepts that can be tested in a
laboratory. For instance, when philosophers talk about free will, they frequently cite the idea that free will is
necessary to assign moral responsibility; thus, moral responsibility is one reason to believe in the existence of
free will. Consequently, you might wonder whether most people do, in fact, believe that the existence of free
will is necessary to assign moral responsibility. This claim can be tested, for instance, by posing problems or
scenarios to research subjects and asking them whether the absence of free choice removes moral
responsibility. Similar strategies have been applied to causation, philosophy of biology, consciousness,
personal identity, and so forth. In these areas, philosophers use experimental methods to find out what
average people think about philosophical issues. Since common sense and intuition are already a source of
evidence in philosophical reasoning, it makes sense to confirm that what philosophers ascribe to common
sense or intuition aligns with what people generally think about these things.
Such experimental research is subject to many of the same issues that confront experimentation in the social
sciences. These studies need to be replicable and ought to fall within a psychological or biological theory that
helps explain them. When philosophers tread into experimental philosophy, they behave a lot more like
scientists than philosophers, and they are held to the same rigorous standards as other researchers in similar
experimental disciplines.
Results from Other Disciplines
The relevance of experimental methods for philosophy suggests a broader source of evidence for philosophical
claims, namely, the results of scientific disciplines. When philosophers make claims about the natural world,
they ought to be aware of what the natural sciences say. When philosophers make claims about human nature,
they ought to be aware of what biology and the social sciences say. As we have already seen, there is an
important difference between philosophical investigation and these various disciplines. Yet, given that
philosophers attempt to gain some understanding of truth as a whole, they ought to welcome evidence from
other disciplines that can help them better understand portions of that whole truth.
Table 1.1 summarizes these different types of philosophical evidence.
Type of
Evidence
Description
Example
History
The insights of historical
philosophers, sages, natural
philosophers, and religious thinkers
can help us understand
contemporary philosophical
questions.
The question “What is a good life?” is a perennial
philosophical concern; attempts at answers from the past
continue to have relevance for contemporary people.
Intuition
The philosophical meaning of
intuition can best be traced back to
Plato, for whom intuition involved a
kind if insight into the very nature of
things.
The truth of a mathematical sentence like “2+2=4” is so
clear that if it turned out to be wrong, you would have to
give up core beliefs about the nature of numbers, addition,
and equality.
TABLE 1.1 Types of Philosophical Evidence
18
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

Type of
Evidence
Description
Example
Common
sense
When philosophers talk about
common sense, they mean specific
claims based on direct sense
perception.
Someone who is holding their hand in front of their face can
rightly claim “this is my hand” without having to resort to
any further proofs.
Experimental
philosophy
The basic idea motivating
experimental philosophy is that
philosophers use terms and
concepts that can be tested in a
laboratory.
A philosopher might pose scenarios to research subjects
and ask them whether they believe an absence of free
choice would remove moral responsibility in these
scenarios, in order to test a philosophical claim about moral
responsibility and free will.
Results from
other
disciplines
Evidence from other disciplines can
help philosophers better
understand portions of
philosophical inquiries.
Information provided by other social scientists (e.g.,
sociologists, historians, anthropologists) can be used to
inform philosophical claims about human nature.
TABLE 1.1 Types of Philosophical Evidence
Logic
One of the first and most reliable ways that philosophers have of verifying and analyzing claims is by using
logic, which is, in some sense, the science of reasoning. Logic attempts to formalize the process that we use or
ought to use when we provide reasons for some claims. By interpreting the claims we make using logic, we can
assess whether those claims are well founded and consistent or whether they are poorly reasoned. The chapter
on logic and reasoning will provide much more detail about the nature of logic and how it is used by
philosophers to arrive at truth.
CONNECTIONS
The chapter on logic and reasoning covers this topic of logic in greater detail.
Argument
The first and most important move in logic is to recognize that claims are the product of arguments. In
particular, a claim is just the conclusion of a series of sentences, where the preceding sentences (called
premises) provide evidence for the conclusion. In logic, an argument is just a way of formalizing reasons to
support a claim, where the claim is the conclusion and the reasons given are the premises. In normal
conversation and even philosophical writing, arguments are rarely written so clearly that one can easily
identify the premises and the conclusion. Nevertheless, it is possible to reconstruct any argument as a series of
sentences with clearly identified premises and conclusions. This process is the first step in analyzing an
argument: identify the claim that is being made, then identify the sentences that provide supporting evidence
for the argument. This process will necessarily require some interpretation on the part of the reader.
Therefore, it is important to try to remain faithful to the original intention of the argument and outline the
premises and conclusions in such a way that they display the reasoning of the person making that claim.
Once the premises and conclusion are identified and written in order, it is possible to use formal techniques to
evaluate the argument. Formal techniques will be covered in the chapter on logic and reasoning. For now, it is
sufficient to note that there is a process for evaluating whether claims are well supported by using the
techniques of logic. Poorly supported claims may be true, but without good reasons to accept those claims, a
1.2 • How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
19

person’s support of them is irrational. In philosophy, we want to understand and evaluate the reasons for a
claim. Just as a house that is built without a solid foundation will rapidly deteriorate and eventually fall, the
philosopher who accepts claims without good reasons is likely to hold a system of beliefs that will crumble.
Explanation
While arguments can be thought of as building blocks to construct a solid foundation for beliefs about the
world, arguments can also be understood as explanations for phenomena that are evident but not well
understood. To generate well-founded beliefs, we start with evidence in the form of premises and infer a
conclusion from that evidence. To explain observed phenomena, we start with a conclusion in the form of
some observation and reason backward to the evidence that explains why the observation is true. For example,
we infer that there is a fire based on the appearance of smoke, or we infer lightning when we hear thunder,
even if we do not see the lightning. We can compare the way we reason about explanations to the way a
detective might reconstruct a crime based on the evidence found at a crime scene. By reconstructing the
premises that led to a given conclusion, a philosopher can explain the reasons for a conclusion that are evident
through observation. In summary, logical reconstruction can be used to investigate the world around us,
providing a rational explanation for why the world is the way it appears.
Coherence
Finally, logic provides philosophers with a powerful technique for assessing a set of claims or beliefs. We can
ask whether a set of beliefs is logically consistent with one another. Given that we expect our beliefs to present
to us a world that makes rational sense, we want those beliefs to be internally consistent. A set of beliefs or
statements is coherent, or logically consistent, if it is possible for them to all be true at the same time. If it is
not possible for statements or beliefs to be true at the same time, then they are contradictory. It seems
unreasonable for a person to accept contradictory claims because a contradiction is a logical impossibility. If a
person holds contradictory beliefs, then they must be wrong about at least some of their beliefs.
Metaphorically, the house of beliefs in which they live must be poorly founded, at least in some places. When
you are reading philosophy, you should be aware of places where the author says things that appear to be
inconsistent. If you discover inconsistencies, that is a good indication that at least one of their claims is false.
You may not know which claim is false, but you can know it is logically impossible for all claims to be true.
When faced with the possibility of incoherent beliefs, the philosopher will need to either revise those beliefs so
that they become consistent, or they will need to give up some beliefs to preserve others. Logical consistency
cannot tell us that a set of beliefs is true; a complete fiction might be logically consistent. But logical
consistency can tell us what is not true. It is impossible for a logically inconsistent set of beliefs to be wholly
true.
Conceptual Analysis
One of the techniques that philosophers use to clarify and understand philosophical statements (either
premises or conclusions) is conceptual analysis. Conceptual analysis involves the analysis of concepts,
notions, or ideas as they are presented in statements or sentences. The term analysis has been a part of
philosophical terminology and methodology since its beginning. In its most basic sense, analysis refers to the
process of breaking apart complex ideas into simpler ones. Analysis also involves a cluster of related strategies
that philosophers use to discover truths. Each of these techniques attempts to arrive at a clearer and more
workable definition of the concepts in question.
When students are asked to give a definition of some concept or term, they frequently go to a dictionary. But a
dictionary provides only a description of how a concept is used in ordinary speech. A dictionary cannot tell us
what the word means in a fundamental sense because dictionary definitions never ask whether that common
usage is coherent, accurate, or precise. It is up to the person engaged in reflection on the concept to figure out
what the term means and whether that meaning fits within a larger understanding of the world. The next
section illustrates four methods of analysis.
20
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

Predicates
When philosophers today talk about concepts, they are usually referring to a notion that comes from the work
on logic done by German philosopher Gottlob Frege. Frege demonstrated that any sentence in natural
language could be translated into a formal, symbolic language, provided that we consider the sentence to be a
kind of function that describes a relationship between names (or objects) and concepts. This symbolic
language is what has become modern logic. Frege modeled his logic on mathematics, with the idea that he
could eliminate the ambiguity and vagueness of natural language by translating it into a purely symbolic
notation. Following Frege, we can break sentences into parts, including names, or object identifiers, and
concepts, or predicates.
FIGURE 1.7 Young Gottlob Frege in about 1879. (credit: “Young Frege” by Unknown author/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain)
Predicates are descriptive terms, like “yellow,” “six feet tall,” or “faster than a speeding bullet.” Simple
sentences like “the flower is yellow,” or “Superman is faster than a speeding bullet” can be easily analyzed into
object terms and predicates. But any sentence can be analyzed in multiple ways. And some sentences express
multiple relations between predicates and objects. So the role of conceptual analysis is to identify the right
predicates for analysis and to clarify the relationship between them. Predicates can help us clarify statements.
For any sentence, we can ask, what is being predicated, and how is it being predicated?
Descriptions
While the concepts that describe or categorize objects can be analyzed using predicates, the objects
themselves can be analyzed by using descriptions. Bertrand Russell identified definite descriptions as the way
to analyze proper names or objects. His idea is that in a sentence like “the flower is yellow” or “my dog likes
naps,” the subject term—“flower” or “dog”—can be substituted with a descriptive sentence that uniquely
identifies this particular flower or dog. There are unique characteristics that differentiate my dog from all
others, for instance: my dog was born on a certain day, lives in a certain city, belongs to me, or occupies a
specific location. Similarly, the flower can be identified by its position in a garden, field, or particular
geographical location. One of Russell’s insights was that proper names, such as “Max” (suppose it is the name I
1.2 • How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
21

use to call my dog), are definite descriptions in disguise. That is, any proper name can be substituted with a
description that identifies the one and only thing named.
A definite description is a way of analyzing names and object terms for the purpose of making them more like
predicates. This way we can clarify what we are talking about without resorting to gestures, context, or direct
experience. You probably do this in your everyday life when you encounter confusion about a name. For
instance, suppose a coworker says, “Kevin used up all the paper in the printer.” If there is more than one Kevin
in the office, you might answer, “Which Kevin?” And your coworker may then respond, “The one with brown
hair whose workspace is right next to the entrance.” “Oh,” you might reply, “You mean the one with the picture
of his kids on his desk?” In a sense, this process of disambiguating the reference for the name “Kevin” is a
process of seeking a more definite description to supplement the proper name. Understanding that language is
composed of definite descriptions and predicates can help us remove some of the ambiguity and vagueness
that is a natural part of speech.
Enumeration
Sometimes, to understand the meaning of a concept, it is helpful to enumerate its component parts. For
instance, we may say that a governmental body is composed of its legislature, its executive, and its judicial
branches. Or we might recognize that a cell is composed of a nucleus, a cell wall, and organelles. The process of
enumeration can help us specify the nature of the thing we are talking about. In effect, we are identifying the
parts that make up a whole. Since claims about the whole can be analyzed as claims about its parts and claims
about how the parts pertain to the whole, it is helpful to enumerate the parts and consider how claims about
the whole relate to claims about the parts.
Just as enumeration is helpful in understanding material things, it can be used to understand abstract
concepts. For example, Aristotle says that wisdom is composed of scientific knowledge, plus understanding,
where understanding is the grasp of first principles and scientific knowledge is the grasp of demonstrated
reasoning that follows from first principles. Whether or not Aristotle is correct, his enumeration may help us
understand the nature of wisdom.
Thought Experiments
When philosophers want to clarify the relationship between concepts, they often consider hypothetical
scenarios meant to isolate one or more features of a concept and place it in the appropriate relationship with
other concepts. Such hypothetical scenarios are called thought experiments. These imaginative scenarios
allow us to test or compare concepts to better understand their connections and logical consequences.
Philosophers have used thought experiments for as long as we have a written record of philosophical thought.
For instance, Plato devised an elaborate thought experiment in The Republic, in which he depicts Socrates and
several of his friends describing an ideal city. The premise of this thought experiment is that if the
philosophers could describe an ideal city in detail, they would be able to identify which part of the city gives
rise to justice.
Aristotle, a Greek philosopher who followed Plato, arrives at the famous claim that “nature abhors a vacuum”
(i.e., nature would not allow empty space between matter) by constructing a thought experiment. To argue for
this conclusion, Aristotle assumes that there is such a void and then asks, how could one know the distance
between two points in a vacuum? If there is any distance between two points, Aristotle reasons, that distance
would have to be the property of something. But, by hypothesis, there is nothing between the two points: it is a
pure void. Aristotle bases his reasoning on the idea that it is impossible for properties to exist without
something they are the property of. This argument reveals that Aristotle thinks distance is a property of
matter. Accordingly, it is impossible to measure distance in a pure void. Therefore, Aristotle reasons, it is not
possible for a void to exist because it would occupy a distance that has no measure. Puzzles like this one can
prompt fruitful philosophical reflection. What do you think about it?
Thought experiments are also common in ethics as a way of testing out moral theories. A moral theory could
22
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

be supported by a thought experiment if the result of applying the theory to a hypothetical case made good
moral sense. On the other hand, the thought experiment might undermine the moral theory by demonstrating
that when the theory is applied, it results in an absurd or immoral outcome. In any case, thought experiments
can help us clarify the relationship between our concepts and theories.
Table 1.2 summarizes these four methods of conceptual analysis.
Type of
Conceptual
Analysis
Description
Application
Predicates
Predicates are descriptive terms, like “yellow”
or “six feet tall”. The role of conceptual analysis
is to identify the right predicates for analysis
and to clarify the relationship between them.
Predicates can help us clarify statements. For
any sentence, we can ask, what is being
predicated, and how is it being predicated?
Descriptions
A definite description is a way of analyzing
names and object terms for the purpose of
making them more like predicates. This way we
can clarify what we are talking about without
resorting to gestures, context, or direct
experience.
Understanding that language is composed of
definite descriptions and predicates can help us
remove some of the ambiguity and vagueness
that is a natural part of speech.
Enumeration
The process of enumeration can help us specify
the nature of the thing we are talking about. In
effect, we are identifying the parts that make
up a whole.
Since claims about the whole can be analyzed
as claims about its parts and claims about how
the parts pertain to the whole, it is helpful to
enumerate the parts and consider how claims
about the whole relate to claims about the parts.
Thought
experiments
Thought experiments are hypothetical
scenarios meant to isolate one or more features
of a concept and place it in the appropriate
relationship with other concepts.
Thought experiments allow us to test or
compare concepts to better understand their
connections and logical consequences.
TABLE 1.2 Four Methods of Conceptual Analysis
Trade-offs
Conceptual analysis, logic, and sources of evidence together help philosophers compose a picture of the world
that helps them get a better grasp of truth. Recall that philosophers are attempting to understand how things
hang together in the broadest possible sense. However, it is unlikely that any single philosophical picture of the
world will turn out to be so obviously compelling that it completely satisfies all criteria of logic, evidence, and
conceptual analysis. It is much more likely that there will be competing pictures, each with strong reasons for
believing in it. This situation is the basis for philosophical discussions. No one picture is so obviously true that
all others can be discarded. Instead, we have to evaluate each picture of the world and understand the trade-
offs that these pictures impose on us. We have to consider the practical and logical implications of the beliefs
we hold to fully understand whether those beliefs are true and right.
1.2 • How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
23

Excerpt from “Thinking and Moral Considerations” by Hannah Arendt
Hannah Arendt was a German-Jewish philosopher who fled Germany in the 1930s and eventually settled in New
York City, where she became a prominent public intellectual. She is best known for her work on totalitarianism,
power, and the notion of evil. She coined the phrase “the banality of evil” when reporting for the New Yorker
magazine on the Nuremberg trial of Nazi bureaucrat Adolf Eichmann. The Nuremberg trials were a series of trials
held in Nuremberg, Germany, after World War II in which Nazi leaders were held accountable for their war crimes
before the international community. Subsequently, Arendt wrote the article “Thinking and Moral Considerations,” in
which she describes the ways that Eichmann’s inability or unwillingness to consider the real, moral consequences of
his actions caused him to behave in radically immoral ways. Arendt diagnoses the core problem of a person like
Eichmann as “not stupidity but a curious, quite authentic inability to think.” She considers thought to involve
aesthetic and moral judgments; thus, for a person to engage in evil action, they must necessarily disregard self-
reflection and conscientious thought.
Read this article, particularly focusing on the first two paragraphs and the last four paragraphs. You may be able to
obtain a copy of the article through JSTOR (https://openstax.org/r/jstor) if you access this database through your
college library. Then consider the following questions:
•
In what sense does thinking require consideration of moral and aesthetic concerns? What is the relationship
between thought and judgment?
•
How does the word conscience function in Arendt’s analysis? What is important about this word for
understanding the nature of thought?
•
How does the figure of Socrates function in Arendt’s analysis to reveal the role of thinking?
•
Why is thinking, in the sense that Arendt considers it, so easily disregarded by society? When does thinking
matter most?
“Biting the Bullet”
Sometimes when weighing the trade-offs of a particular view and its logical consequences, you may decide to
“bite the bullet.” This means that you are willing to accept the negative consequences of the view because you
find the view attractive for other reasons. For instance, on the topic of free will, a philosopher might be
committed to the idea that past events fully determine the future. In such a case, the philosopher is willing to
accept the negative implication that free will is an illusion. In ethics, some philosophers are committed to the
view that morality is entirely determined by the total quantity of effects caused by an action. Such
philosophers may be willing to accept things that would otherwise seem immoral, like harming an individual
person, if that action results in a greater quantity of positive effects in the end. No view is going to be perfect,
and it is difficult to make sense of the world in terms that we can explain and understand. Nonetheless, we
must be honest about the logical and moral consequences of the views we hold. If you are ultimately willing to
accept those consequences to maintain the view, then you can bite the bullet.
Reflective Equilibrium
Another method for assessing the logical and moral consequences of our thinking is to use judgments about
particular cases to revise principles, rules, or theories about general cases. This process of going back and
forth between an assessment of the coherence of the theory and judgments about practical, applied cases is
called reflective equilibrium. This process requires the revision of a theoretical and principled stance based
on practical judgments about particular cases. Reflective equilibrium is achieved when you are able to
establish some coherence between your theoretical and practical beliefs. Reflective equilibrium is a kind of
coherence method: that is, reflective equilibrium justifies beliefs by assessing their logical consistency. As
opposed to a traditional coherence approach, however, reflective equilibrium encourages the use of practical
READ LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
24
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

and applied judgments about cases as part of the set of beliefs that is logically consistent. Reflective
equilibrium is an important method for introductory students to understand because students are frequently
tempted to think they need to solve theoretical issues first before they can consider applications. Or they may
choose a theory and then try to apply it to cases. Reflective equilibrium emphasizes that this procedure is
likely neither possible nor desirable. Instead, a philosopher should be aware of both the theoretical
commitments and the practical concerns of their position and use their understanding of each to inform the
final analysis of their beliefs.
1.3 Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain Socrates’s appreciation for the limits of human knowledge.
•
Identify Socrates’s primary moral principles.
•
Describe Socrates’s life, death, and philosophical interests.
•
Compare Socrates’s moral philosophy with classical Indian philosophy.
Socrates is a foundational figure for Western philosophy. Even though he did not write any works himself, his
life and thought are captured by three different, contemporary sources whose works we still have. Socrates is
depicted in several of Aristophanes’s comedic plays. Aristophanes, an accomplished Athenian playwright, won
several dramatic competitions of his day. Eleven of his 40 plays survive, and in three of them—The Clouds, The
Frogs, and The Birds—Socrates appears as a main character. Aristophanes’s depiction of Socrates is ridiculous,
and Plato appears to think that this depiction is partially responsible for Socrates’s ultimate trial and death.
Another contemporary of Socrates, the historian Xenophon, wrote an account of Socrates’s trial and death in
his Memorabilia. Finally, and most important, Socrates’s student and friend Plato made Socrates the central
figure in nearly all of his dialogues. Plato and Aristotle are the most influential of the Athenian philosophers
and have had a profound influence on the development of Western philosophy. Plato wrote exclusively in the
form of dialogues, where his characters engage in discussion centered on philosophical issues. Most of what
we know about Socrates is derived from Plato’s depiction of him as the primary questioner in most of the
dialogues. Therefore, even though Socrates did not write works of his own, his life—and death—remain a
testament to his profound and impactful philosophical life. For that reason, it is useful for us to consider the
figure of Socrates as a paradigm of the philosophical life.
1.3 • Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
25

FIGURE 1.8 Roman 1st century marble sculpture of Socrates, which is perhaps a copy of a lost bronze statue made
by Lysippos. (credit: “Head of Socrates, 1st Century, A.D.” by Nathan Hughes Hamilton/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
In particular, Socrates’s defense of himself during his trial is in many ways a defense of the philosophical life.
Socrates was accused by a young, upstart politician named Meletus of corrupting the youth and undermining
the gods of the city. These crimes were considered to be a kind of treason that undermined the legitimacy and
future of Athenian democracy. The speech Socrates gave in his own defense to the Athenians, as recorded by
Plato, remains a vivid and compelling defense of the sort of life he lived. In the end, his defense was not
successful. He was convicted, imprisoned, and killed in 399 BCE. Plato provides accounts of the trial and
death, not only in the Apology, but also in the Crito, where Socrates argues with his friend Crito that it would be
unjust for him to escape from prison, and in the Phaedo, where Socrates engages in a debate with several close
friends, arguing in his jail cell just before he dies that the soul is immortal.
This excerpt from Plato’s Apology (https://openstax.org/r/platosapology), translated by Benjamin Jowett, records
one account of Socrates’s defense at his trial. He is responding to accusations made against him in front of the
Assembly, which was the main governing body and jury for trials in Athens. This body was composed of 500 citizens.
I dare say, Athenians, that someone among you will reply, “Why is this, Socrates, and what is the origin of
these accusations of you: for there must have been something strange which you have been doing? All this
great fame and talk about you would never have arisen if you had been like other men: tell us, then, why
this is, as we should be sorry to judge hastily of you.” Now I regard this as a fair challenge, and I will
endeavor to explain to you the origin of this name of “wise,” and of this evil fame. . . . I will refer you to a
witness who is worthy of credit, and will tell you about my wisdom—whether I have any, and of what
sort—and that witness shall be the god of Delphi. You must have known Chaerephon; he was early a friend
of mine, and also a friend of yours, for he shared in the exile of the people, and returned with you. Well,
Chaerephon, as you know, was very impetuous in all his doings, and he went to Delphi and boldly asked the
READ LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
26
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

oracle to tell him whether—as I was saying, I must beg you not to interrupt—he asked the oracle to tell him
whether there was anyone wiser than I was, and the Pythian prophetess answered that there was no man
wiser. Chaerephon is dead himself, but his brother, who is in court, will confirm the truth of this story.
Why do I mention this? Because I am going to explain to you why I have such an evil name. When I heard
the answer, I said to myself, “What can the god mean? and what is the interpretation of this riddle? for I
know that I have no wisdom, small or great. What can he mean when he says that I am the wisest of men?
And yet he is a god and cannot lie; that would be against his nature.” After a long consideration, I at last
thought of a method of trying the question. I reflected that if I could only find a man wiser than myself, then
I might go to the god with a refutation in my hand. I should say to him, “Here is a man who is wiser than I
am; but you said that I was the wisest.” Accordingly I went to one who had the reputation of wisdom, and
observed to him—his name I need not mention; he was a politician whom I selected for examination—and
the result was as follows: When I began to talk with him, I could not help thinking that he was not really
wise, although he was thought wise by many, and wiser still by himself; and I went and tried to explain to
him that he thought himself wise, but was not really wise; and the consequence was that he hated me, and
his enmity was shared by several who were present and heard me. So I left him, saying to myself, as I went
away: “Well, although I do not suppose that either of us knows anything really beautiful and good, I am
better off than he is—for he knows nothing, and thinks that he knows. I neither know nor think that I know.
In this latter particular, then, I seem to have slightly the advantage of him.” Then I went to another, who
had still higher philosophical pretensions, and my conclusion was exactly the same. I made another enemy
of him, and of many others besides him.
After this I went to one man after another, being not unconscious of the enmity which I provoked, and I
lamented and feared this: but necessity was laid upon me—the word of God, I thought, ought to be
considered first. And I said to myself, “Go I must to all who appear to know, and find out the meaning of the
oracle.” And I swear to you, Athenians, by the dog I swear!—for I must tell you the truth—the result of my
mission was just this: I found that the men most in repute were all but the most foolish; and that some
inferior men were really wiser and better. I will tell you the tale of my wanderings and of the “Herculean”
labors, as I may call them, which I endured only to find at last the oracle irrefutable. When I left the
politicians, I went to the poets; tragic, dithyrambic, and all sorts. And there, I said to myself, you will be
detected; now you will find out that you are more ignorant than they are. Accordingly, I took them some of
the most elaborate passages in their own writings, and asked what was the meaning of them—thinking that
they would teach me something. Will you believe me? I am almost ashamed to speak of this, but still I must
say that there is hardly a person present who would not have talked better about their poetry than they did
themselves. That showed me in an instant that not by wisdom do poets write poetry, but by a sort of genius
and inspiration; they are like diviners or soothsayers who also say many fine things, but do not understand
the meaning of them. And the poets appeared to me to be much in the same case; and I further observed
that upon the strength of their poetry they believed themselves to be the wisest of men in other things in
which they were not wise. So I departed, conceiving myself to be superior to them for the same reason that
I was superior to the politicians.
At last I went to the artisans, for I was conscious that I knew nothing at all, as I may say, and I was sure
that they knew many fine things; and in this I was not mistaken, for they did know many things of which I
was ignorant, and in this they certainly were wiser than I was. But I observed that even the good artisans
fell into the same error as the poets; because they were good workmen they thought that they also knew all
sorts of high matters, and this defect in them overshadowed their wisdom—therefore I asked myself on
behalf of the oracle, whether I would like to be as I was, neither having their knowledge nor their ignorance,
or like them in both; and I made answer to myself and the oracle that I was better off as I was.
This investigation has led to my having many enemies of the worst and most dangerous kind, and has given
occasion also to many calumnies, and I am called wise, for my hearers always imagine that I myself
1.3 • Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
27

possess the wisdom which I find wanting in others: but the truth is, O men of Athens, that God only is wise;
and in this oracle he means to say that the wisdom of men is little or nothing; he is not speaking of
Socrates, he is only using my name as an illustration, as if he said, “He, O men, is the wisest, who, like
Socrates, knows that his wisdom is in truth worth nothing.” And so I go my way, obedient to the god, and
make inquisition into the wisdom of anyone, whether citizen or stranger, who appears to be wise; and if he
is not wise, then in vindication of the oracle I show him that he is not wise; and this occupation quite
absorbs me, and I have no time to give either to any public matter of interest or to any concern of my own,
but I am in utter poverty by reason of my devotion to the god.
“The Life Which Is Unexamined Is Not Worth Living”
After Socrates is convicted and has a chance to address the jury to persuade them to offer him a sentence or
punishment other than death, he considers and then rejects the idea of exile. If he lived in exile, Socrates
believed he would no longer be able to carry on his work as a philosopher because a foreign city would be even
less welcoming of his strange questioning than his hometown. In speaking about this alternative, he says the
following:
Someone will say: “Yes, Socrates, but cannot you hold your tongue, and then you may go into a foreign
city, and no one will interfere with you?” Now I have great difficulty in making you understand my
answer to this. For if I tell you that this would be a disobedience to a divine command, and therefore
that I cannot hold my tongue, you will not believe that I am serious; and if I say again that the greatest
good of man is daily to converse about virtue, and all that concerning which you hear me examining
myself and others, and that the life which is unexamined is not worth living—that you are still less
likely to believe. (Plato, Apology)
This idea—that a life that is “unexamined” is not worth living—strikes at the heart of what Socrates tells us
motivates him to live a philosophical life. The statement ought to make us pause and reflect, not only because
Socrates himself demonstrates his commitment to a particular kind of life, to the point of accepting death, but
also because the charge that an unexamined life is not worth living rightly seems like such a serious thing. To
have lived a life that is not worth living: What could be worse? Given the stakes, we ought to wonder, what does
Socrates mean by an unexamined life? Or, alternatively, what would it look like to examine one’s life in the
appropriate way?
Examination of the Self
The first form of examination that Socrates clearly advises is self-examination. At the temple to the oracle at
Delphi, one of three maxims engraved in stone is the phrase “know thyself.” Like most oracular statements, it
is not clear what is meant by this phrase. Plato suggests it may be a kind of warning to those who enter the
oracle: “Know your position relative to the gods!” Alternatively, it may be a command to understand your own
nature and your own mind before you seek to understand other people or the things of the world. Based on our
reading of Socrates’s life and works, we can assume that he considers this saying to be a command to
investigate our beliefs and knowledge, to appreciate the limits of our own knowledge, and to strive to eliminate
inconsistencies. After all, Socrates’s method of questioning as it is described in Plato’s dialogues (and as
Socrates himself describes in the excerpted passage) is exactly such an inquiry.
Socrates questions others about whether their beliefs are consistent and whether they have adequate
justification for the beliefs they hold. This line of questioning suggests that Socrates holds such consistency
and internal justification in high regard. We can imagine that Socrates considers an unexamined life to be one
in which a person holds beliefs without justification or holds beliefs that are inconsistent with one another. We
may then speculate that an unexamined is not worth living because it is dictated by beliefs and ideas that have
never been tested, justified, or accounted for. You might respond that endless questioning is boring or difficult,
or you may respond that “ignorance is bliss.” For a philosopher, this attitude is not only undesirable, but it also
28
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

approaches irrationality. It seems that, whatever makes life worth living for creatures capable of rational
thought, a minimum requirement is that we believe things worth believing in, hold positions we can defend,
and understand why we do what we do. To do that, we need to engage in self-examination.
FIGURE 1.9 This image depicts Socrates in deep conversation with Athenian statesman Alciabiades, Athenian
politician and orator Pericles, and Aspasia, a well-known Milesian woman who gained political and philosophical
influence as Pericles’ romantic partner. (credit: “Drawing, Socrates, Pericles, Alcibiades, Aspasia in Discussion” by
Felice Giani/Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum, Public Domain)
Examination of Nature
Even though Socrates himself did not develop an account of nature and the cosmos like many of the pre-
Socratic philosophers, we may imagine that living an examined life requires us to understand the world
around us. Socrates himself was well aware of the various natural philosophical accounts that were prominent
in his day. Plato frequently records Socrates quoting or citing another philosopher’s account of the planets and
stars, natural change, or other natural phenomenon when he is questioning others. Indeed, several of the
dialogues place Socrates in conversations about the nature of the soul, the nature of causality, the classification
of animals and plants, and so forth, all of which could fall under the examination of nature. Why might such a
process of examination be important for a life worth living? We might speculate that it is important for us
remain curious. The capacity to reason gives human beings the ability to investigate how things work—to
discover truths about the world around them. Neglecting that drive to understand the world around us is like
neglecting a natural skill. Methods of philosophical reflection can help us make sense of the world around us.
Such investigation is characteristic of the ancient philosophers and may be considered part of a life worth
living.
Human Wisdom Is Worth Little or Nothing
In the excerpt from Plato’s Apology, Socrates investigates the oracle’s strange response that he is the wisest of
men. First, Socrates attempts to prove the oracle wrong by finding someone wiser than he. But, after a time, he
comes to realize that the oracle’s response was a kind of riddle. He interprets the oracle as saying that Socrates
is wisest because he alone realizes that human wisdom is worth little or nothing. This realization is important
for Socrates’s own self-examination and provides an important lesson for philosophy students.
1.3 • Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
29

Understanding the Limits of Knowledge
Perhaps one of the greatest lessons you can learn from a well-rounded college education is just how much
more there is to know about the world. Even the most respected scientists, philosophers, mathematicians, and
historians recognize that the scope of their expertise is extremely limited. A lifetime of study can, at best, give
a person deep insight into a tiny fraction of the universe of human knowledge. Beyond that, there is a vast
domain of things that no human has yet discovered or understood. Consequently, it is a good idea to practice
Socrates’s advice: to be aware of what you do not know and not to assert knowledge where you lack it. People
are often resistant to taking this position because they want answers. Someone who can convince others that
they know the solution to their problems or personal dilemmas can exert a great deal of power over them. But
we ought to recognize the dangers of asserting knowledge where we lack it. In technical areas, a refusal to
admit ignorance can result in the failure of equipment, the malfunctioning of machines, and in the worst
cases, injury and loss of life. In the moral and political arenas, asserting knowledge where you lack it may lead
to unnecessary disagreements and polarization, or it may result in ill-considered actions that result in ethical
mistakes or harm to others. Most importantly, if you are not aware when you lack knowledge, you will not seek
to acquire the knowledge you lack. If you believe you already know something, you will not listen to the
evidence that disproves what you believe. As a result, you will miss out on learning the truth.
The Socratic Method
Socrates engaged in a particular method of questioning, sometimes known as the Socratic method, that was
characterized by his asking questions of others rather than explaining his own beliefs. Socrates is typically
hesitant to offer his own ideas about the topic under discussion. Instead, he asks the people he is questioning
to supply the subject matter for their discussion. Socrates’s use of this strategy may be puzzling. One
explanation may be that he is following the god’s command, as he says in the Apology. Another explanation is
that he does not claim to have knowledge about the topic in question and is genuinely happy to learn from
others. Yet another possibility is that Socrates feigns ignorance and is being insincere. Perhaps his true goal is
to trap or humiliate the other person by discovering some inconsistency or obvious falsehood in what they
believe. It is hard to know which of these is the most likely explanation, but we will focus for a moment on a
fourth possibility, namely, a pedagogical one.
In two different Platonic dialogues, Socrates explains what he is doing by using an analogy: he compares his
method of questioning to the role taken by a midwife during childbirth. In fact, Plato tells us that Socrates’s
mother was a midwife and that he assumes her role in philosophical conversation. The goal of Socratic
questioning, then, is to assist the person being questioned in discovering the truth on their own. By asking
questions and examining the claims made by another person, Socrates allows that person to go through a
process of self-discovery. This method provides an interesting lesson for teaching and learning. Often,
students believe that their role is to simply receive knowledge from the teacher. But Socrates reminds us that
real learning comes only through self-discovery and that the role of the teacher is to be an assistant, providing
the kind of critical examination and evaluation necessary to help the student discover truth on their own.
The Importance of Doing No Harm
Even though many early philosophers were concerned with understanding nature, Socrates is much more
concerned with ethics, or how to live a good life. He considers the primary purpose of philosophy to make one’s
life better by making the philosopher a better person. Even though Socrates rarely claims to have knowledge
about anything at all, the few instances where he does profess knowledge relate directly to morality. In
particular, Socrates asserts a pair of moral principles that are quite controversial and may appear at first
glance false. However, upon closer inspection, you may find that these principles bear some truth that is worth
consideration.
Socrates’s Harm Principle
Socrates’s harm principle claims the following:
30
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

1.
No one willingly chooses what is harmful to themselves.
2.
When a person does harm to others, they actually harm themselves.
The first principle is sometimes stated as “no one intentionally chooses evil,” but for the purposes of this
discussion, it will be clearer to consider the above formulation. The important thing to understand about the
first principle is that Socrates believes that when people choose bad things, they do so out of ignorance. The
reason he thinks so is that he believes all people desire what is good. For Socrates, it is intuitively true that
whatever someone desires, that desire is always directed at something that appears good to them, which
means a person cannot choose what is harmful for its own sake. Instead, Socrates reasons, when individuals
do harmful things, they believe that what they are doing will bring about some good for them. In other words,
when people choose evil, they do so in the belief that it is good or will bring about something good. If, in fact,
they are wrong, then that was the fault of ignorance, not a desire to do evil. If they had better understood the
consequences of their actions, Socrates reasons, they would not have chosen something harmful.
The second principle derives from the fact that Socrates thinks the greatest harm that can come to anyone is
for their soul—or their character—to become corrupted. Since a corrupted soul is the result of making the
kinds of choices that produce harm, it follows that whenever someone does something harmful, they corrupt
their soul, so they harm themselves. At the end of the Apology, Socrates argues that it is not possible to harm a
good man because, even though you might kill him, you cannot harm his character or make him do evil.
Socrates seems to regard physical suffering, and even death, as a temporary and minor harm. Moreover, he
regards the harm to one’s character by living a life of ignorance or malevolence as far worse than physical
death.
•
Do you agree with the first principle of Socrates, which leads him to claim that no one willingly does harm? Why
do you agree or disagree with him?
•
Can you think of examples from your own life or experience that demonstrate that people deliberately do harm
for harm’s sake?
•
Is the second claim true or false? Can you think of examples to prove the second claim true? False?
•
Why might Socrates believe that harm to one’s character is more significant than even death? Is Socrates
mistaken? If you believe he is mistaken, on what do you base your claim?
When you answer these questions, be sure to give Socrates the benefit of the doubt. After all, there is no question
that Socrates was a smart person. He lived at a different time and may appear strange to you, but you will find that
his ideas are still relevant if you give them some consideration. After you take Socrates seriously, can you still find an
error in Socrates’s thinking?
Comparison of Socrates’s Harm Principle with Ahimsa in the Indian Tradition
It may be instructive to consider the possible connection between the core concept of ahimsa in classical
Indian philosophy and Socrates’s harm principle as discussed above. Etymologically, the word ahimsa, in
Sanskrit, literally means “the absence of doing injury or harm.” The concept is found throughout Hindu, Jain,
and Buddhist texts and likely has its origins deep in classical Indian thought. A well-known illustration of
ahimsa comes from Jainism, where the concept is taken to what most of us would consider to be extreme
measures—at least in the case of Jain ascetics observing ahimsa as one of the “great vows.” Such ascetic Jains
must take the greatest possible care not to cause harm, intentionally or unintentionally, to any creature,
including insects, plants, and microbes. At the end of their lives, a devout Jain may even fast to death (stop
eating) in one final renunciation of doing harm. Another well-known example of ahimsa can be seen the
philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi, who used the concept to establish a nonviolent civil disobedience movement
that some say helped speed the colonial British departure from India.
THINK LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
1.3 • Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
31

Ahimsa is identified as one of the highest virtues in the Vedic tradition (the Vedas are the most sacred
scriptures of India) and is one of the loftiest teachings in Indian philosophy. The idea of ahimsa informs animal
ethics, just-war theory, and interpersonal relations. On a metaphysical level, ahimsa is connected with
karma—the causal law that links causes to effects, even across lifetimes. This informs the belief that an
individual will bear a future burden for harms committed in the present through the process of samsara, or
transmigration and rebirth of the soul. According to this religious and philosophical theory, the soul brings
both its good and bad karma (fruit of action) with it from life to life and will either enjoy the fruits of prior good
actions or suffer the consequences of bad ones. Because of the laws of karma and reincarnation, any action
resulting in violence, injury, or harm has the direct consequence of chaining an individual’s soul to a process of
rebirth and material suffering. Insofar as a person causes injury and suffering to others, they increase the total
negative effects in nature. In summary, the individual creates bad effects for themselves by acting badly. From
the perspective of Indian philosophy, there is a natural connection among all beings, so causing harm or injury
to one entity is like harming a family member or even a part of oneself. Additionally, because individual
experience is governed by the laws of karma, harm and injury to others has the result of causing injury to
oneself.
However, ahimsa does not focus only on the problem of causing harm. The practice of ahimsa also calls for the
practice of love and compassion toward all beings. Following the same principles of karma and samsara, acts
of love, kindness, and generosity have the effect of increasing the total amount of good in the world, of
recognizing that we are, in the words of Martin Luther King Jr., “caught in an inescapable network of
mutuality” and “tied in a single garment of destiny” (1963). The practice of love and compassion increases the
possibility of liberation from material suffering.
It may be useful to consider possible comparisons between the Indian notion of ahimsa and Socrates’s harm
principle. Both doctrines teach that by causing harm, acting through violence, or causing suffering to others,
we actually harm ourselves. They describe different mechanisms for how that harm comes to us. Which do you
think sounds more likely to be true? Are there other advantages or disadvantages to either view?
Additionally, Socrates says that no one directly desires to cause harm or do evil; harm is the product of
ignorance. For Indian philosophers, there is a connection between harm or suffering and ignorance as well.
For them, suffering is caused by attachment to temporary things, both material and immaterial, including
feelings, goals, or ideals. The remedy for attachment is enlightenment, which comes from recognizing that all
perceptions, feelings, and desires emerge from prior causes and that the chain of causes continues without
end. All things that are part of the chain of causes, according to Indian philosophers, are temporary. Once a
person has this realization, they ought to recognize the harm that comes from attachment, from trying to hold
on to any product of the unending chain of causes. The connection between ignorance and harm is quite
different for each philosophy, but it may be worthwhile to consider how and why they are different. It may also
be worthwhile to reflect on whether there is a connection between harm and ignorance and what it might be.
1.4 An Overview of Contemporary Philosophy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the role of professional philosophers in academics and beyond.
•
Identify the structure, organization, and thematic goals of the textbook.
Contemporary academic philosophy bears minimal resemblance to the classical traditions we have discussed
in the previous sections. Philosophers today, like other academics, focus on specific areas of research
expertise with the goal of producing new research that advances our philosophical understanding of specific
problems or topic areas. That said, philosophical investigation is still motivated by the same desire to make
sense of things in the most general way possible. In this section, we will introduce you to what philosophy
majors do. Additionally, we will provide a brief summary of the themes and organization of the textbook.
32
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

What Can You Do with a Philosophy Major?
Majoring in philosophy is a great way to complete a liberal arts degree. Philosophy will introduce you to
fascinating ideas and teach you to think analytically and creatively. If you enjoy the topics in this book, you
should consider a philosophy major.
Becoming a Philosophy Teacher
To pursue a career in academic philosophy, you must major in philosophy as an undergraduate and continue
your studies in the field by doing some graduate work. Community colleges and some four-year schools
employ instructors with a master’s degree in philosophy. However, it is very common for these jobs to be
occupied almost entirely by people with PhDs. Academic jobs, particularly in the humanities and liberal arts,
are extremely competitive. Even with a PhD, it will be difficult to find a job in an academic department. That
said, it is much more common to find jobs teaching than doing research, but many teaching jobs still require
some research. A philosophy professor or instructor may be asked to teach on a wide variety of subjects,
depending on the needs of the school. By contrast, when doing research, academic philosophers tend to focus
on a very specific area with the goal of becoming an expert in that topic. Expertise is generally marked by the
production of research work, such as a dissertation, book, or several research articles on the topic. Academic
research jobs are typically secured with tenure, meaning that there are strong protections against unjustified
firing. However, recent studies of federal data show that 73 percent of all academic jobs are not on the tenure
track (meaning there is no chance to secure tenure). Additionally, 40 percent of all academic teaching
positions are occupied by part-time faculty. The distribution of tenured, tenure-track, non-tenure track, and
part-time employees varies greatly by institution type, with community colleges employing far more part-time
instructors and far fewer tenured and tenure-track instructors. Meanwhile, research universities employ more
tenured and tenure-track faculty and fewer part-time faculty (AAUP 2018).
Alternatives to Academic Philosophy
Philosophy undergraduate and graduate degree majors have many options outside of teaching and research in
an academic environment. There is a widespread and somewhat mistaken belief that the purpose of selecting
a college major is to prepare you for a specific career. While that may be true for some technical degrees, like
engineering or nursing, it is generally not true for degrees in the liberal arts and sciences. Many students enter
college with a desire to pursue a career in some area of business or commerce. Others plan to go on to a
professional graduate school in medicine or law. While it may seem like the best career decision would be to
major in business, premed, or prelaw, this notion is probably misguided.
The original idea behind a liberal arts and sciences education was that high school graduates could study a
broad range of fields in the core areas of knowledge that are foundational for our culture, society, and
civilization—areas like the natural and social sciences, literature, history, religion, and philosophy. By studying
these fields, students gain insights into the key ideas, methods of investigation, questions, and discoveries that
underlie modern civilization. Those insights give you a perspective on the world today that is informed by the
history and learning that make today’s world possible. And that perspective can have a transformative effect
that goes far beyond job preparation.
When philosophy majors are compared to other majors in terms of their long-term career earnings, it appears
that philosophy majors do very well. While the starting salaries of philosophy majors are lower than some
other majors, their mid-career salaries compare very favorably with majors in areas like finance, engineering,
and math.
1.4 • An Overview of Contemporary Philosophy
33

FIGURE 1.10 Median mid-career salaries (10 years after graduation) by college major. Philosophy majors make
more, on average, than those majoring in many other areas. (source: Wall Street Journal) (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax under CC BY 4.0 license)
Additionally, philosophy majors have some of the highest LSAT and GMAT scores of any major (these are the
tests generally required for admission to law school and business school, respectively). Quite a few former
philosophy majors have gone on to become CEOs of large corporations, such as Reid Hoffman, cofounder of
LinkedIn, and Carly Fiorina, CEO of Hewlett-Packard (Chideya 2015).
Many philosophers who have earned a graduate degree in philosophy and held positions as professors and
instructors have made successful transitions to other careers, including start-ups, technology, business, ethics
review boards, and public philosophy. Nigel Warburton, a former philosophy professor, started the philosophy
podcast “Philosophy Bites” that is one of the most downloaded podcasts on academic topics. He also is an
editor-in-chief of the online magazine Aeon. David Barnett, a former philosophy professor, founded the
company PopSockets in 2012 after leaving academia. That company now employs over 200 people and
generates hundreds of millions of dollars in annual revenue. Additionally, there are a growing number of
technology, neuroscience, and medical firms that are specifically looking to hire philosophers to help with
research and ethics reviews. Marcus Arvan maintains a public directory of academic philosophers who have
found work outside of academia at Philosophers in Industry (https://openstax.org/r/philosopher). In short,
philosophers can be found nearly everywhere doing useful work and making good money. You should not let
concerns about career prospects drive you away from studying philosophy.
An Overview of Your Philosophy Textbook
This textbook is organized in a way that generally reflects the broad areas of specialization in contemporary
academic philosophy. Areas of specialization can be grouped into the following fields: historical traditions;
34
1 • Introduction to Philosophy
Access for free at openstax.org

metaphysics and epistemology; science, logic, and mathematics; and value theory. The fields of science, logic,
and mathematics include research into contemporary symbolic logic as well as interdisciplinary work in the
philosophy of mathematics and the sciences; these areas are closely related to metaphysics and epistemology.
Value theory includes metaethics and the meaning of value, aesthetics, normative moral theories (ethics), and
political philosophy. This textbook aims to provide a general overview of each of these areas. We give students
a theoretical survey of each field in philosophy and introduce applications of these areas of study to
contemporary issues of interest. Additionally, we have an explicitly multicultural focus. We emphasize that
philosophy has been studied and practiced throughout the world since the beginning of recorded history. In
doing so, we are attempting to confront the Eurocentric bias that has been inherent to the study of philosophy
in the West and create a more inclusive curriculum.
Throughout this text, we introduce you to the stunning array of philosophers and ideas from ancient Greece,
Rome, and China, the classical Islamic and the late medieval European worlds, Africa, India, Japan, and Latin
America. We help situate you within the different regions and time periods using timelines and other tools.
Whether you go on to study philosophy or this is the only philosophy course you take, the habits of mind and
techniques of philosophical thought you will learn can have a transformative effect. When you allow yourself to
reflect on how a certain situation connects to the whole, when you critically examine your own biases and
beliefs, when you investigate the world with an open mind, informed by rational methods of investigation, you
will arrive at a richer sense of who you are and what your place is in the world.
1.4 • An Overview of Contemporary Philosophy
35

Summary
1.1 What Is Philosophy?
The word “philosophy” derives from ancient Greek, in which the philosopher is a lover or pursuer (philia) of
wisdom (sophia). The earliest Greek philosophers were not known as philosophers; they were simply known as
sages. The sage tradition is a largely prehistoric tradition that provides a narrative about how intellect,
wisdom, piety, and virtue lead to the innovations central to the flourishing of ancient civilizations. Particularly
in Greece, the sage tradition blends into a period of natural philosophy, where ancient scientists or
philosophers try to explain nature using rational methods.
Wilfrid Sellars emphasizes that philosophy’s goal is to understand a very wide range of topics—in fact, the
widest possible range. That is to say, philosophers are committed to understanding everything insofar as it can
be understood. A philosopher chooses to study things that are informative and interesting—things that provide
a better understanding of the world and our place in it. To make judgments about which areas are interesting
or worthy of study philosophers need to cultivate a special skill. Sellars describes this philosophical skill as a
kind of know-how. Philosophical know-how has to do with knowing your way around the world of concepts and
being able to understand and think about how concepts connect, link up, support, and rely upon one
another—in short, how things hang together.
1.2 How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
The goal of philosophy is to provide a coherent story of how the world as it appears to us can be explained in a
way that also makes sense of what the sciences tells us. Given the influence of philosophy on world history, it is
worthwhile to engage with the writings of past philosophers to inform our understanding of pressing
philosophical questions of today.
What philosophers today mean by intuition can best be traced back to Plato, for whom intuition (nous)
involved a kind of insight into the very nature of things. This notion has had religious connotations, as if the
knowledge gained through intuition is like catching a glimpse of divine light.
When philosophers talk about common sense, they mean specific claims based on direct sense perception,
which are true in a relatively fundamental sense. In other words, philosophical champions of common sense
deny that one can be skeptical of certain basic claims of sense perception.
Experimental philosophy is a relatively recent movement in philosophy by which philosophers engage in
empirical methods of investigation, similar to those used by psychologists or cognitive scientists. Philosophers
use experimental methods to find out what average people think about philosophical issues. Since common
sense and intuition are already a source of evidence in philosophical reasoning, it makes sense to confirm that
what philosophers ascribe to common sense or intuition aligns with what people generally think about these
things.
Logic attempts to formalize the process that we use or ought to use when we provide reasons for some claims.
The first and most important move in logic is to recognize that claims are the product of arguments. In
particular, a claim is just the conclusion of a series of sentences, where the preceding sentences (called
premises) provide evidence for the conclusion. In logic, an argument is just a way of formalizing reasons to
support a claim, where the claim is the conclusion and the reasons given are the premises.
A set of beliefs or statements is coherent, or logically consistent, if it is possible for them to all be true at the
same time. If it is not possible for statements or beliefs to be true at the same time, then they are contradictory.
It seems unreasonable for a person to accept contradictory claims because a contradiction is a logical
impossibility. If a person holds contradictory beliefs, then they must be wrong about at least some of their
beliefs.
One of the techniques that philosophers use to clarify and understand philosophical statements (either
premises or conclusions) is conceptual analysis. Conceptual analysis involves the analysis of concepts,
36
1 • Summary
Access for free at openstax.org

notions, or ideas as they are presented in statements or sentences. The term analysis has been a part of
philosophical terminology and methodology since its beginning. In its most basic sense, analysis refers to the
process of breaking apart complex ideas into simpler ones. Analysis also involves a cluster of related strategies
that philosophers use to discover truths. Each of these techniques attempts to arrive at a clearer and more
workable definition of the concepts in question.
1.3 Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
Most of what we know about Socrates is derived from Plato’s depiction of him as the primary questioner in
most of the dialogues. The idea that a life which is “unexamined” is not worth living strikes at the heart of what
Socrates tells us motivated him to live a philosophical life. The first form of examination that Socrates clearly
advises is self-examination. Even though Socrates rarely claims to have knowledge about anything at all, the
few instances where he does profess knowledge relate directly to morality. In particular, Socrates asserts a pair
of moral principles that are quite controversial and may appear at first glance false. Socrates claims the
following: 1) No one willingly chooses what is harmful to themselves; 2) When a person does harm to others,
they actually harm themselves.
Socrates engaged in a particular method of questioning, sometimes known as the “Socratic method,” which
was characterized by his asking questions of others rather than explaining his own beliefs. The goal of Socratic
questioning is to assist the person being questioned in discovering the truth on their own. By asking questions
and examining the claims made by another person, Socrates allows that person to go through a process of self-
discovery.
1.4 An Overview of Contemporary Philosophy
Contemporary academic philosophy is different from the classical traditions, although the motivation for
doing philosophy remains the same. If you are interested in pursuing a career in academic philosophy, a
graduate degree—most likely a PhD—is required. However, philosophy majors at any level can have fulfilling
and rewarding careers in a variety of fields.
This textbook is organized in a way that generally reflects the broad areas of specialization in contemporary
academic philosophy. Areas of specialization can be grouped into the following fields: historical traditions;
metaphysics and epistemology; science, logic, and mathematics; and value theory. The fields of science, logic,
and mathematics include research into contemporary symbolic logic as well as interdisciplinary work in the
philosophy of mathematics and the sciences; these areas are closely related to metaphysics and epistemology.
Value theory includes metaethics and the meaning of value, aesthetics, normative moral theories (ethics), and
political philosophy. This textbook aims to provide a general overview of each of these areas.
Key Terms
Ahimsa one of the highest virtues of classical Indian religions. It is the practice of refraining from harming
other living things.
Argument a set of sentences, where some of those sentences (called premises) provide support for another
sentence, called the conclusion.
Coherence a situation in which it is possible for a set of beliefs or statements to be true at the same time.
Common sense knowledge primarily derived from perception that seems clearly or obviously true.
Conceptual analysis the process of taking apart and making sense of sentences or claims by examining their
component parts.
Definite description a method of conceptual analysis that substitutes a descriptive phrase that uniquely
identifies the object or thing named for an object term or proper name.
Enumeration the listing of the component parts of a concept, notion, or thing.
Experimental philosophy philosophy that uses methods from experimental science to test claims made in
philosophy.
1 • Key Terms
37

Intuition certain and evident cognition; the kind of knowledge that is so clear that it seems impossible for it to
be false.
Logic the formalization of reasoning.
Milesians a school of early philosophers from Miletus; followers of Thales. They were known for examining
the underlying causes of natural phenomena.
Philosophy the “love of wisdom.” An academic discipline that attempts to grasp the broadest possible
understanding of things. It is characterized by rational explanation and a willingness to question
assumptions.
Predicate the portion of a sentence that provides the description or characterization of an object or name. (A
philosophical predicate is different from the predicate of grammar, and their definitions should not be
confused.)
Reflective equilibrium a process of reviewing a theoretical position by going back and forth between the
theory and its practical applications. This process seeks coherence between theory and practice.
Sage a wise person. Many ancient cultures designated important wise figures as “sages.”
Sanatana dharma the core or absolute set of moral and religious duties ordained for all people of ancient
India, regardless of class or caste, and that predate the term Hinduism.
Socratic method a method of questioning used by Socrates (and named after him later) to help people
understand what they were thinking and to arrive at some truth.
Thought experiment an imaginative scenario that tests some philosophical theory or concept by considering
how it might apply in the imagined situation.
References
———. The Republic. Translated by Allan Bloom. New York: Basic Books, 1968.
Adler, Joseph A. 2006. “Daughter/Wife/Mother or Sage/Immortal/Bodhisattva? Women in the Teaching of
Chinese Religions.” ASIANetwork Exchange 14 (2): 11–16.
American Associate of University Professors (AAUP). 2018. “Data Snapshot: Contingent Faculty in US Higher
Ed.” October 11, 2018. https://www.aaup.org/sites/default/files/
10112018%20Data%20Snapshot%20Tenure.pdf.
Cheng, Julia. 1983. “The Ancient Sages (sheng): Their Identity and Their Place in Chinese Intellectual History.”
Oriens Extremus 30:1–18.
Chideya, Farai. 2015. “Philosophers Don’t Get Much Respect, But Their Earnings Don’t Suck.” FiveThirtyEight.
November 11, 2015. https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/philosophers-dont-get-much-respect-but-their-
earnings-dont-suck/.
Descartes, René. “The Rules for the Direction of the Mind.” The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Translated
and edited by John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch, 7–78. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985.
Diogenes Laërtius. (1925) 1972. Lives of Eminent Philosophers. Translated by R. D. Hicks. New York: G.P.
Putnam’s Sons. http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0004.tlg001.perseus-eng1:1.prologue
King, Martin Luther, Jr. 1963. “Letter from Birmingham Jail.” April 16, 1963. https://letterfromjail.com/.
McCarthy, Julie. 2015. “Fasting to the Death: Is It a Religious Rite or Suicide?” NPR. September 2, 2015.
https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2015/09/02/436820789/fasting-to-the-death-is-it-a-religious-
rite-or-suicide.
Moore, G. E. 1939. “Proof of an External World.” Proceedings of the British Academy 25:273–300.
Oruka, Henry Odera. 1990. Sage Philosophy: Indigenous Thinkers and Modern Debate on African Philosophy.
Nairobi: African Center for Technological Studies (ACTS) Press; also published by Leiden, The Netherlands:
38
1 • References
Access for free at openstax.org

Brill.
Plato. Apology, translated by Benjamin Jowett. http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html
Plato. Apology. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html.
Rout, Naresh. 2016. “Role of Women in Ancient India.” Odisha Review, 72 (6): 42–47.
Sellars, Wilfred. 1962. “Philosophy in the Scientific Image of Man.” In Frontiers of Science and Philosophy,
edited by Robert Colodny, 35–78. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh.
Waithe, Mary Ellen, ed. 1987. A History of Women Philosophers, Vol. I: Ancient Women Philosophers, 600
BC–500 AD. Boston, MA: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Zhang, Fenzhi. 2015. Xi Jinping: How to Read Confucius and Other Chinese Classical Thinkers. Beijing: CN
Times Books.
Review Questions
1.1 What Is Philosophy?
1. What are some common characteristics of ancient sages in the Greek, Indian, and Chinese traditions?
2. What characteristics are essential for being identified as a “sage”?
3. What is the connection between sages and philosophers?
4. Provide one example of an ancient philosopher or sage who was doing something like natural science.
What made this philosopher’s activity scientific?
5. What does it mean for philosophy to “have an eye on the whole”? How is this different from other
disciplines?
6. Why is it necessary for philosophers to discard suppositions or assumptions that may be acceptable in
other disciplines?
1.2 How Do Philosophers Arrive at Truth?
7. What are five sources of evidence commonly used in philosophy? Which of these are empirical? Which do
not require observation or experiment?
8. What are three techniques used in conceptual analysis? Explain how they work.
9. What is coherence? What does it mean for a set of beliefs or statements to be coherent?
10. What do philosophers mean by intuition?
11. What are thought experiments?
1.3 Socrates as a Paradigmatic Historical Philosopher
12. Consider Socrates's conclusion that "human wisdom is worth little or nothing." Do you think this is true?
Why or why not?
13. Do you think the Socratic method is an effective way of maintaining humility about knowledge?
14. What do you think Socrates means by "the life which is unexamined is not worth living"? Do you agree?
15. Compare and contrast Socrates's moral philosophy with that of the Hindu principle of ahimsa.
1.4 An Overview of Contemporary Philosophy
16. What are the primary areas of specialization in academic philosophy?
1 • Review Questions
39

Further Reading
Arendt, Hannah. 1971. “Thinking and Moral Considerations.” Social Research 38 (3): 417–446.
Daniels, Norman. 2016. “Reflective Equilibrium.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Updated October
14, 2016. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entries/reflective-equilibrium/.
Knobe, Joshua. n.d. “Program in Cognitive Science and Department of Philosophy.” Department of Philosophy
and Cognitive Science at Yale, Experimental Philosophy. http://experimental-philosophy.yale.edu/
Ludlow, Peter. 2018. “Descriptions.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Updated April 5, 2018.
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/descriptions/.
Marques, Joan. 2012. “Consciousness at Work: A Review of Some Important Values, Discussed from a Buddhist
Perspective.” Journal of Business Ethics 105 (1): 27–40.
Masolo, Dismas. 2016. “African Sage Philosophy.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Updated February
22, 2016. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/entries/african-sage/.
Plato. “The Theaetetus.” Translated by Benjamin Jowett. http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/theatu.html.
40
1 • Further Reading
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 2.1 Thinking: a sculpture of two figures in Prague. (credit: modification of “Thinking” by Kurtis Garbutt/
Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1 The Brain Is an Inference Machine
2.2 Overcoming Cognitive Biases and Engaging in Critical Reflection
2.3 Developing Good Habits of Mind
2.4 Gathering Information, Evaluating Sources, and Understanding Evidence
2.5 Reading Philosophy
2.6 Writing Philosophy Papers
You have likely heard the term “critical thinking” and have probably been instructed to
become a “good critical thinker.” Unfortunately, you are probably also unclear what exactly this means because
the term is poorly defined and infrequently taught. “But I know how to think,” you might say, and that is
certainly true. Critical thinking, however, is a specific skill. This chapter is an informal and practical guide to
critical thinking and will also guide you in how to conduct research, reading, and writing for philosophy
classes.
Critical thinking is set of skills, habits, and attitudes that promote reflective, clear reasoning. Studying
philosophy can be particularly helpful for developing good critical thinking skills, but often the connection
between the two is not made clear. This chapter will approach critical thinking from a practical standpoint,
2
Critical Thinking, Research,
Reading, and Writing

with the goal of helping you become more aware of some of the pitfalls of everyday thinking and making you a
better philosophy student.
While you may have learned research, reading, and writing skills in other classes—for instance, in a typical
English composition course—the intellectual demands in a philosophy class are different. Here you will find
useful advice about how to approach research, reading, and writing in philosophy.
2.1 The Brain Is an Inference Machine
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the role of emotion in thought.
•
Explain how cognitive systems produce inferences without conscious thought.
One of the first steps to becoming a more critical and reflective thinker is to understand how and why you are
prone to making mistakes in thinking. These mistakes are not the result of a lack of intelligence but are a
function of the way our minds work and how they naturally lead us astray.
From a biological perspective, we have been shaped by hundreds of thousands of years of evolution, which
have primed our brains to become extremely effective inference machines. An inference is the mental process
that allows us to draw conclusions from evidence. While we tend to think of inference as a deliberative and
conscious process, we infer all kinds of things unconsciously, effortlessly, and immediately; in fact, most of
sense perception is a kind of inference. Inference making has been crucial to human survival, but our
conclusions are not always correct. By becoming aware of how our brains function to ward off threats and
provide us with “cognitive ease,” or a feeling of well-being and comfort, we can begin to correct for and guard
against faulty thinking.
The Brain’s Adaptive Ability to Plan Ahead
One insight of evolutionary biology is that every cell and organ in our body is adapted to its local environment
for the purpose of making it more likely that our genes will survive into the next generation. Consequently, it’s
helpful to think about the brain’s role in propagating our genes. Our brains facilitate our survival and promote
our ability to find a partner and reproduce by using thought, calculation, prediction, and inference. For this
reason, our natural and genetically primed ways of thinking do not necessarily serve the goals of philosophy,
science, or truth.
42
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 2.2 The “mind-brain” problem points to the unclear relationship between our thoughts, feelings, and
perceptions, and the neurological and electrochemical interactions that take place in the brain. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Philosophical Caveats about “Brain Talk”
Before we get much further, note that it is important to be cautious when we talk about brains and minds,
which are distinct concepts. In fact, the relationship between mind and brain is one of the central problems of
metaphysics, known as the “mind-body problem,” which might just as well be called the “mind-brain
problem.” Briefly stated, the mind-body problem is the problem of understanding the relationship between the
organic gray and white matter in our skulls (the brain) and the range of conscious awareness (the mind). We
know that the brain and central nervous system provide the physical basis for our thoughts, perceptions,
emotions, imagination, and desire—in short, our entire mental life. But biology does not tell us what the
relationship is between our private mental life and the neurological, electrochemical interactions that take
place in the brain. Is the relationship of the mind to the brain like the relationship between lightning and
electrical discharge or a rainbow and the refraction of light through water droplets? In other words, is “the
mind” just the term we use to label certain kinds of brain activity? Some philosophers think so. However,
mental activity is not easily associated with any specific brain activity. Additionally, there seems to be
something about the subjective experience of our mental life that is lost when we attempt to explain it fully in
terms of brain activity. So other philosophers maintain that the mind is something different from the brain.
Nonetheless, the mind and the brain are closely and somewhat mysteriously connected. As a result, it can be
helpful to use the resources of psychology and cognitive science (the study of the brain’s processes) to help us
understand how to become better thinkers. We can think of the resources from psychology and cognitive
science as providing us with a description of how the brain actually behaves. By contrast, when we study
critical thinking, we are interested in how we ought to think. Being aware of how we do think may help us
devise effective strategies for how we ought to think, but we should understand that the descriptions provided
by psychology are not determinative. In this chapter, we explore psychological findings that can help you
become more reflective about the ways your thinking can go wrong.
CONNECTIONS
Read more about the nature of the mind and the mind-body problem in the chapter on metaphysics.
2.1 • The Brain Is an Inference Machine
43

Representation as Projection
While you may consider thinking to be made up of ideas or thoughts, philosophers and cognitive scientists use
the term representation to describe the basic elements of thinking. Representations are information-bearing
units of thought. This notion of representation can be traced back to Aristotle and has played a significant role
in the history of philosophy, but in contemporary philosophy the term representation is more precise. When
we think about things, whether through perception, imagination, memory, or desire, we represent those
things. What is represented may be something present and real, or it may be fictitious, imagined in the future,
or remembered from the past. Representations may even be unconscious. That is, the mind may have some
defined content that is directed toward an object without the person being aware that they have produced such
a representation.
During the process of representation, even in a relatively simple case of visual perception, the brain makes a
complex set of inferences. For instance, consider the checkerboard below. You might imagine that when you
perceive something like a checkerboard, your brain passively takes a mental picture of the grid. In this
analogy, the eye functions like the lens of a camera, and the brain develops the picture to present to the mind.
But there are several problems with this model. First, where is the picture in your brain? Who is viewing the
picture in your head? There are further problems with the camera analogy that can be revealed when we
examine optical illusions. Look at the checkered set of squares in Figure 2.2. Are the horizontal lines parallel?
FIGURE 2.3 The horizontal lines on this grid are parallel, but unless you look at the image from the side, it is
impossible to “see” this. This is one of many examples of common perceptual illusions. (credit: “Optical Illusion” by
Selena N. B. H. CC BY 2.0)
In fact, the horizontal lines are parallel, but unless you look at the image from the side, it is impossible to
visualize this. There are countless examples of these types of perceptual illusions. We represent the world
outside as a stable picture that is completely filled in, in full focus, and uniformly colored. In reality, our visual
field is limited and hazy around the edges, and colors change dramatically depending on lighting conditions,
distance, movement, and a host of other factors. In fact, your brain is not passively capturing the world, like a
camera, but is actively projecting the world so that it makes sense to you. In the illusion above, your brain is
automatically adjusting your perception of the colored squares by accounting for the shadow cast by the
cylinder. So your brain presents square B as if it is lighter than A by adjusting the hue of B to account for the
shadow.
Neuroscientist David Eagleman (2011) uses the analogy of the front page of a newspaper to describe how
perception works. The front page is a representation of the world’s events for a given day. Of course, it does not
44
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

present a full or complete picture of the world, but a summary intended to highlight the events of
consequence, those that have changed, and those that we are most likely to care about. Like a newspaper
editor, your brain is working overtime to project an image of the world based on what is relevant to your
survival. You unconsciously adjust the images you perceive to give you the impression that they are far away,
nearby, moving, and so forth. Instead of the fully formed, three-dimensional image of the world we seem to
see, we actually perceive a kind of sketch, highlighting what we need to know to navigate safely in our
environment and obtain what we need. You probably think that sense perception is the clearest and most
certain way you can know the world around you. As the adage says, “Seeing is believing.” To become a better
critical thinker, however, you will need to become skeptical of some of your basic beliefs. There are times when
you absolutely should not believe your lying eyes.
Emotions and Reason: Homeostasis and Allostasis
In addition to the editorial license of mental representation, thinking is not always as rational as we imagine.
The neuroscientist Antonio Damasio (1994) was one of the first to popularize the notion that rational thought is
tempered by emotions. He is critical of what he perceives as the philosophical bias against emotion in the
history of philosophy. In Descartes’ Error, he says modern philosophers have neglected the role of emotions in
thought, imagining that the goal of rational thinking is to eliminate the influence of emotions. Instead, his
years of clinical work with patients revealed to him that emotions cannot be separated from reason. Our most
rational thoughts are, in fact, guided, informed, and influenced by emotions. According to Damasio, reasoning
and intelligence function best when we care about something. Without feelings, says Damasio, we are less
rational, not more rational.
Damasio (1994) explains that emotions serve to maintain homeostasis in the brain through the chemical
messengers known as neurotransmitters. Homeostasis is the biological tendency to find a neutral state of
equilibrium (the word stasis means “standing still,” and homeo means “same or similar”). This process relies
on a feedback loop where current bodily states are monitored, observed, and then altered to bring the body
back into balance. Most homeostatic processes in the body are unconscious, but emotions are linked to
conscious awareness. For instance, when your blood sugar is low and your body needs calories, there is a
series of chemical processes that give rise to the feeling of hunger. This is a conscious signal that you need to
eat; it promotes behavior that ensures survival. Similarly, a rustling sound in the bushes at night will trigger a
series of physiological responses (heightened senses, increased heart rate, pupil dilation, etc.) that correspond
to the feeling of fear and promote behavior, such as fight or flight, that are necessary for survival. What
Damasio demonstrates is that emotions have their own feedback mechanism, so that an idea or image can
generate physiological responses even in the absence of an external stimulus. Because emotional responses
and conscious thought are closely linked, decision-making can be influenced by this emotional-physiological
feedback mechanism. Our thinking can go astray because we are afraid of bad outcomes, and that fear
dominates a more rational calculation about which course of action is most beneficial (1994, 172–175).
In addition to maintaining equilibrium, the brain also anticipates future events and circumstances by
projecting likely scenarios based on a catalog of past experiences and concepts generated through social
norms and social interactions. The process of regulation that prepares the body to anticipate future needs
before they arise is called allostasis (allo means “other or different”). Psychologist Lisa Feldman Barrett (2017)
explains that the brain stores neural pathways that are triggered by external or internal stimuli to provide the
closest match to the current situation. The neural pathways form a kind of template of action, promoting
behavior like increased heart rate, pupil dilation, or motion. Feelings are a goal-oriented response to certain
situations: they prepare us to behave and react in certain ways that promote what is beneficial to the body and
sharpen and shape our awareness of the world.
In summary, the brain makes inferences about the world through perceptions, emotions, and concepts that are
largely unconscious and deeply ingrained in our psyches. This process allows us to navigate fluidly and
accurately through a world with so many and varied stimuli. Our reactions to stimuli are partially homeostatic,
2.1 • The Brain Is an Inference Machine
45

meaning that the body tends to bring itself back into an optimal state of equilibrium, and partially allostatic,
meaning that the body prepares for and anticipates future situations. Together, these impulses construct a
picture of the world that we experience seamlessly and dynamically. Our experience is far more complicated
than the crude mental model we imagine. We are projecting and constructing the world we experience as
much as we are recording and viewing it. And that fact has important consequences for the kind of reflective
and critical thought we ought to engage in when we try to think clearly about the world.
The Evolutionary Advantage of Shortcuts
Human beings have evolved to navigate the world most effectively and efficiently by engaging conscious
awareness only when necessary. For that reason, you can walk through the grocery store while thinking about
what you are going to cook for dinner. You do not have to consciously think about where to go, how to slow
down to make way for other people, or how hard to push the shopping cart so that it maintains momentum in
front of you even as its weight changes as you add groceries to the basket. All that biomechanical activity can
be outsourced to unconscious mechanisms as you scan your shopping list. The brain is quite good at engaging
in habitual activities without the assistance of conscious thought. And that is a good thing because conscious
thought is expensive in energy terms. Consider the picture that follows.
FIGURE 2.4 Many inferences can be made about this woman’s inner experience based on her expression and
posture. While such inferences can be made quickly, they cannot be verified without further investigation, and they
are highly susceptible to error, bias, and stereotyping. (credit: “CL Society 226: Woman with mobile phone” by
Francisco Osorio/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
You are probably immediately able to provide complex inferences about this picture, such as the woman is
worried, concerned, or anxious about something. The inferences you make about this image are easy, fast, and
complex. They are driven by the kind of emotional and conceptual thought processes that are unconscious and
efficient. While these inferences are quick and easy, you may also be aware that they are provisional without
more information. Given more data about the circumstances surrounding this picture, you might revise your
perception about what is going on. This is exactly the sort of thinking that drives the emotional projections
discussed in the previous section.
46
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

A different type of thinking is required to solve a math problem. The following example comes from
psychologist Daniel Kahneman’s book Thinking Fast and Slow (2013). Try to solve the following in your head:
24 × 14 =
Do you know the answer? For most people, multiplying two-digit numbers without pen and paper (or a
calculator) is quite difficult. You might need perhaps 10 or 20 seconds of effortful thinking to solve the problem
in your head since you do not have the unconscious mechanisms to do so automatically. Long-term social and
evolutionary pressures have shaped our brains to find efficient solutions to complex questions about facial
expressions. The same cannot be said for math problems. Knowing the solution to a math problem may be
useful, but it is not the sort of thing generally required for survival and reproduction. On the other hand,
quickly reading other people’s emotions is at times vital for survival. There are other interesting differences
between these two kinds of thinking. While it is difficult to solve the math problem, once you solve it, you can
be 100 percent certain the answer is correct. By contrast, it is easy to generate a story about facial expressions,
but this story is highly susceptible to error, bias, and stereotyping. As a result, critical thinkers should be
careful not to jump to the first, most obvious solution.
Energy Demands on Deliberate Thinking
Solving a math problem requires rational thought and effort. When we engage in rational thought, our brains
use up precious energy stores that may be required for the maintenance of the body. Because evolutionary
pressures seek to keep us alive long enough to pass our genes to the next generation, we have a biological
tendency to avoid effortful thinking. In a sense, it is evolutionarily wise to be lazy.
The resources demanded by conscious thought can be understood in terms of the familiar notion of
“attention.” When a task requires significant attention, it places increased energy demands on the brain.
Periods of high-attention activity can be stressful, as the body increases blood flow to the brain, delivering
more glucose and oxygen for increased mental activity. Additionally, attention is limited and focused on
specific tasks. Consider the “selective attention test” developed by Daniel Simons and Christopher Chabris.
Watch the video below and see how you perform on this test.
VIDEO
Selective Attention Test
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/introduction-philosophy/pages/2-1-the-brain-is-an-
inference-machine)
How many passes did you count? Did you miss anything in the process? When our attention is focused on a
novel and complex task, we become less aware of other stimuli outside the specific area of focus. Additionally,
we may become fatigued, stressed, or anxious while engaged in paying close attention. Not surprisingly, our
brains prefer automated shortcuts.
Heuristics and Learning
Kahneman (2013) calls these mental shortcuts heuristics, or rules of thumb for drawing inferences. Problem-
solving with heuristics is largely unconscious, automated, effortless, and efficient, but it is not always correct.
Rational thinking or computation requires conscious attention and effort and may not even be possible
without some practice. We are forced to engage in effortful thinking when confronted with something new and
possibly dangerous—or even with something slightly outside of our normal routine. For example, you have
probably driven home from work or school along a familiar route on “autopilot,” preoccupied with your
thoughts. Maybe you have even gotten home and felt as if you cannot remember how you got there. By contrast,
you have probably experienced the stress of navigating a new, unfamiliar city. In the first case, navigation can
be carried out using easy, largely automatic processing, whereas in the second case, navigation requires the
intense resources of active attention and rational calculation.
2.1 • The Brain Is an Inference Machine
47

Sometimes complex activities can become effortless, but unlike when we are on “automatic pilot,” such
activities feel pleasant and fulfilling. When you become fully immersed in a complex activity to the point at
which it becomes effortless, you have entered the state of “flow” (Csikszentmihalyi 2008).
Flow states are possible only for someone who has achieved some level of proficiency at a task. They are
characterized by intense concentration and awareness as well as a sense of personal control or agency, but
they are pleasurable because the challenge of engaging in the task is commensurate with your ability. By
contrast, a novice may find the same tasks stressful and frustrating. This phenomenon can be illustrated using
the notion of the “learning curve” that describes how a novice grows in proficiency.
What this means is that a person may be able to rely on intuitions, gut reactions, and other automatic
responses in a field in which they are an expert, but the novice should be skeptical of these methods of
thinking. As a novice, your mental heuristics are frequently faulty, so you are susceptible to prejudice, implicit
bias, and error.
Consider the case of buying a car. Someone who is deeply familiar with the automobile market as either a
buyer or a seller may be able to estimate the true value of a car easily, but the average person would need to do
a great deal of research to arrive at a true estimate. Because of the effort required for nonexperts to appraise
car value, they are easily influenced by dealer incentives, marked-up list prices, financing options, and other
tricks of the trade. Given that we are all susceptible to these types of errors, it seems like a good idea to try to
become more self-aware and critical and not rely exclusively on gut reactions or intuitions when encountering
new material. Since you are probably a novice in philosophy if you are reading this textbook, you ought to be
suspicious of your gut reactions to and intuitions about philosophical questions. Keep an open mind, and don’t
assume you already understand the philosophical problems you will encounter in the chapters that follow.
Being open to new ideas and allowing yourself to admit some degree of ignorance are important first steps in
becoming a better thinker.
Heuristics and Substitution in Decision-Making
The cognitive biases that we will examine in the next section are based on a more fundamental “substitution
heuristic.” This term describes our tendency to answer a difficult question or problem by substituting it with
an easier question to answer. While substitution often results in an incorrect or inappropriate response, it
gives us a sense of satisfaction or “cognitive ease” in thinking we have solved a problem. For instance, when
you are asked to evaluate something complex and uncertain, like the future value of an investment or the
political prospects of a politician, you are likely to substitute that complex calculation for an easier one. In
particular, you may substitute your positive or negative feelings toward the politician or the investment
product. But your feelings are likely to be guided by your preconceptions.
When the brain defaults to heuristics that produce a less-than-optimal result or even an incorrect decision, it
is operating with a cognitive bias. A cognitive bias is a pattern of “quick” thinking based on the “rule of
thumb.” A person operating under a cognitive bias does not use logic or careful reasoning to arrive at a
conclusion. Cognitive biases are like perceptual illusions. Just like perceptual illusions, cognitive biases are the
result of the natural and, ordinarily, efficient operation of the brain. Even though mental heuristics often work
perfectly well to help give us an estimation of reality without the mental effort required to generate a more
comprehensive picture, cognitive biases are the result of misleading and faulty patterns that arise from this
process.
48
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

2.2 Overcoming Cognitive Biases and Engaging in Critical Reflection
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Label the conditions that make critical thinking possible.
•
Classify and describe cognitive biases.
•
Apply critical reflection strategies to resist cognitive biases.
To resist the potential pitfalls of cognitive biases, we have taken some time to recognize why we fall prey to
them. Now we need to understand how to resist easy, automatic, and error-prone thinking in favor of more
reflective, critical thinking.
Critical Reflection and Metacognition
To promote good critical thinking, put yourself in a frame of mind that allows critical reflection. Recall from
the previous section that rational thinking requires effort and takes longer. However, it will likely result in
more accurate thinking and decision-making. As a result, reflective thought can be a valuable tool in
correcting cognitive biases. The critical aspect of critical reflection involves a willingness to be skeptical of
your own beliefs, your gut reactions, and your intuitions. Additionally, the critical aspect engages in a more
analytic approach to the problem or situation you are considering. You should assess the facts, consider the
evidence, try to employ logic, and resist the quick, immediate, and likely conclusion you want to draw. By
reflecting critically on your own thinking, you can become aware of the natural tendency for your mind to slide
into mental shortcuts.
This process of critical reflection is often called metacognition in the literature of pedagogy and psychology.
Metacognition means thinking about thinking and involves the kind of self-awareness that engages higher-
order thinking skills. Cognition, or the way we typically engage with the world around us, is first-order
thinking, while metacognition is higher-order thinking. From a metacognitive frame, we can critically assess
our thought process, become skeptical of our gut reactions and intuitions, and reconsider our cognitive
tendencies and biases.
To improve metacognition and critical reflection, we need to encourage the kind of self-aware, conscious, and
effortful attention that may feel unnatural and may be tiring. Typical activities associated with metacognition
include checking, planning, selecting, inferring, self-interrogating, interpreting an ongoing experience, and
making judgments about what one does and does not know (Hackner, Dunlosky, and Graesser 1998). By
practicing metacognitive behaviors, you are preparing yourself to engage in the kind of rational, abstract
thought that will be required for philosophy.
Good study habits, including managing your workspace, giving yourself plenty of time, and working through a
checklist, can promote metacognition. When you feel stressed out or pressed for time, you are more likely to
make quick decisions that lead to error. Stress and lack of time also discourage critical reflection because they
rob your brain of the resources necessary to engage in rational, attention-filled thought. By contrast, when you
relax and give yourself time to think through problems, you will be clearer, more thoughtful, and less likely to
rush to the first conclusion that leaps to mind. Similarly, background noise, distracting activity, and
interruptions will prevent you from paying attention. You can use this checklist to try to encourage
metacognition when you study:
•
Check your work.
•
Plan ahead.
•
Select the most useful material.
•
Infer from your past grades to focus on what you need to study.
•
Ask yourself how well you understand the concepts.
•
Check your weaknesses.
•
Assess whether you are following the arguments and claims you are working on.
2.2 • Overcoming Cognitive Biases and Engaging in Critical Reflection
49

Cognitive Biases
In this section, we will examine some of the most common cognitive biases so that you can be aware of traps in
thought that can lead you astray. Cognitive biases are closely related to informal fallacies. Both fallacies and
biases provide examples of the ways we make errors in reasoning.
CONNECTIONS
See the chapter on logic and reasoning for an in-depth exploration of informal fallacies.
Watch the video to orient yourself before reading the text that follows.
VIDEO
Cognitive Biases 101, with Peter Bauman
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/introduction-philosophy/pages/2-2-overcoming-cognitive-
biases-and-engaging-in-critical-reflection)
Confirmation Bias
One of the most common cognitive biases is confirmation bias, which is the tendency to search for, interpret,
favor, and recall information that confirms or supports your prior beliefs. Like all cognitive biases,
confirmation bias serves an important function. For instance, one of the most reliable forms of confirmation
bias is the belief in our shared reality. Suppose it is raining. When you first hear the patter of raindrops on your
roof or window, you may think it is raining. You then look for additional signs to confirm your conclusion, and
when you look out the window, you see rain falling and puddles of water accumulating. Most likely, you will not
be looking for irrelevant or contradictory information. You will be looking for information that confirms your
belief that it is raining. Thus, you can see how confirmation bias—based on the idea that the world does not
change dramatically over time—is an important tool for navigating in our environment.
Unfortunately, as with most heuristics, we tend to apply this sort of thinking inappropriately. One example that
has recently received a lot of attention is the way in which confirmation bias has increased political
polarization. When searching for information on the internet about an event or topic, most people look for
information that confirms their prior beliefs rather than what undercuts them. The pervasive presence of
social media in our lives is exacerbating the effects of confirmation bias since the computer algorithms used
by social media platforms steer people toward content that reinforces their current beliefs and
predispositions. These multimedia tools are especially problematic when our beliefs are incorrect (for
example, they contradict scientific knowledge) or antisocial (for example, they support violent or illegal
behavior). Thus, social media and the internet have created a situation in which confirmation bias can be
“turbocharged” in ways that are destructive for society.
Confirmation bias is a result of the brain’s limited ability to process information. Peter Wason (1960)
conducted early experiments identifying this kind of bias. He asked subjects to identify the rule that applies to
a sequence of numbers—for instance, 2, 4, 8. Subjects were told to generate examples to test their hypothesis.
What he found is that once a subject settled on a particular hypothesis, they were much more likely to select
examples that confirmed their hypothesis rather than negated it. As a result, they were unable to identify the
real rule (any ascending sequence of numbers) and failed to “falsify” their initial assumptions. Falsification is
an important tool in the scientist’s toolkit when they are testing hypotheses and is an effective way to avoid
confirmation bias.
In philosophy, you will be presented with different arguments on issues, such as the nature of the mind or the
best way to act in a given situation. You should take your time to reason through these issues carefully and
consider alternative views. What you believe to be the case may be right, but you may also fall into the trap of
confirmation bias, seeing confirming evidence as better and more convincing than evidence that calls your
50
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

beliefs into question.
Anchoring Bias
Confirmation bias is closely related to another bias known as anchoring. Anchoring bias refers to our
tendency to rely on initial values, prices, or quantities when estimating the actual value, price, or quantity of
something. If you are presented with a quantity, even if that number is clearly arbitrary, you will have a hard
discounting it in your subsequent calculations; the initial value “anchors” subsequent estimates. For instance,
Tversky and Kahneman (1974) reported an experiment in which subjects were asked to estimate the number
of African nations in the United Nations. First, the experimenters spun a wheel of fortune in front of the
subjects that produced a random number between 0 and 100. Let’s say the wheel landed on 79. Subjects were
asked whether the number of nations was higher or lower than the random number. Subjects were then asked
to estimate the real number of nations. Even though the initial anchoring value was random, people in the
study found it difficult to deviate far from that number. For subjects receiving an initial value of 10, the median
estimate of nations was 25, while for subjects receiving an initial value of 65, the median estimate was 45.
In the same paper, Tversky and Kahneman described the way that anchoring bias interferes with statistical
reasoning. In a number of scenarios, subjects made irrational judgments about statistics because of the way
the question was phrased (i.e., they were tricked when an anchor was inserted into the question). Instead of
expending the cognitive energy needed to solve the statistical problem, subjects were much more likely to “go
with their gut,” or think intuitively. That type of reasoning generates anchoring bias. When you do philosophy,
you will be confronted with some formal and abstract problems that will challenge you to engage in thinking
that feels difficult and unnatural. Resist the urge to latch on to the first thought that jumps into your head, and
try to think the problem through with all the cognitive resources at your disposal.
Availability Heuristic
The availability heuristic refers to the tendency to evaluate new information based on the most recent or most
easily recalled examples. The availability heuristic occurs when people take easily remembered instances as
being more representative than they objectively are (i.e., based on statistical probabilities). In very simple
situations, the availability of instances is a good guide to judgments. Suppose you are wondering whether you
should plan for rain. It may make sense to anticipate rain if it has been raining a lot in the last few days since
weather patterns tend to linger in most climates. More generally, scenarios that are well-known to us,
dramatic, recent, or easy to imagine are more available for retrieval from memory. Therefore, if we easily
remember an instance or scenario, we may incorrectly think that the chances are high that the scenario will be
repeated. For instance, people in the United States estimate the probability of dying by violent crime or
terrorism much more highly than they ought to. In fact, these are extremely rare occurrences compared to
death by heart disease, cancer, or car accidents. But stories of violent crime and terrorism are prominent in the
news media and fiction. Because these vivid stories are dramatic and easily recalled, we have a skewed view of
how frequently violent crime occurs.
Tribalism
Another more loosely defined category of cognitive bias is the tendency for human beings to align themselves
with groups with whom they share values and practices. The tendency toward tribalism is an evolutionary
advantage for social creatures like human beings. By forming groups to share knowledge and distribute work,
we are much more likely to survive. Not surprisingly, human beings with pro-social behaviors persist in the
population at higher rates than human beings with antisocial tendencies. Pro-social behaviors, however, go
beyond wanting to communicate and align ourselves with other human beings; we also tend to see outsiders as
a threat. As a result, tribalistic tendencies both reinforce allegiances among in-group members and increase
animosity toward out-group members.
Tribal thinking makes it hard for us to objectively evaluate information that either aligns with or contradicts
the beliefs held by our group or tribe. This effect can be demonstrated even when in-group membership is not
2.2 • Overcoming Cognitive Biases and Engaging in Critical Reflection
51

real or is based on some superficial feature of the person—for instance, the way they look or an article of
clothing they are wearing. A related bias is called the bandwagon fallacy. The bandwagon fallacy can lead you
to conclude that you ought to do something or believe something because many other people do or believe the
same thing. While other people can provide guidance, they are not always reliable. Furthermore, just because
many people believe something doesn’t make it true. Watch the video below to improve your “tribal literacy”
and understand the dangers of this type of thinking.
VIDEO
The Dangers of Tribalism, Kevin deLaplante
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/books/introduction-philosophy/pages/2-2-overcoming-cognitive-
biases-and-engaging-in-critical-reflection)
Sunk Cost Fallacy
Sunk costs refer to the time, energy, money, or other costs that have been paid in the past. These costs are
“sunk” because they cannot be recovered. The sunk cost fallacy is thinking that attaches a value to things in
which you have already invested resources that is greater than the value those things have today. Human
beings have a natural tendency to hang on to whatever they invest in and are loath to give something up even
after it has been proven to be a liability. For example, a person may have sunk a lot of money into a business
over time, and the business may clearly be failing. Nonetheless, the businessperson will be reluctant to close
shop or sell the business because of the time, money, and emotional energy they have spent on the venture.
This is the behavior of “throwing good money after bad” by continuing to irrationally invest in something that
has lost its worth because of emotional attachment to the failed enterprise. People will engage in this kind of
behavior in all kinds of situations and may continue a friendship, a job, or a marriage for the same
reason—they don’t want to lose their investment even when they are clearly headed for failure and ought to cut
their losses.
A similar type of faulty reasoning leads to the gambler’s fallacy, in which a person reasons that future chance
events will be more likely if they have not happened recently. For instance, if I flip a coin many times in a row, I
may get a string of heads. But even if I flip several heads in a row, that does not make it more likely I will flip
tails on the next coin flip. Each coin flip is statistically independent, and there is an equal chance of turning up
heads or tails. The gambler, like the reasoner from sunk costs, is tied to the past when they should be
reasoning about the present and future.
There are important social and evolutionary purposes for past-looking thinking. Sunk-cost thinking keeps
parents engaged in the growth and development of their children after they are born. Sunk-cost thinking
builds loyalty and affection among friends and family. More generally, a commitment to sunk costs encourages
us to engage in long-term projects, and this type of thinking has the evolutionary purpose of fostering culture
and community. Nevertheless, it is important to periodically reevaluate our investments in both people and
things.
In recent ethical scholarship, there is some debate about how to assess the sunk costs of moral decisions.
Consider the case of war. Just-war theory dictates that wars may be justified in cases where the harm imposed
on the adversary is proportional to the good gained by the act of defense or deterrence. It may be that, at the
start of the war, those costs seemed proportional. But after the war has dragged on for some time, it may seem
that the objective cannot be obtained without a greater quantity of harm than had been initially imagined.
Should the evaluation of whether a war is justified estimate the total amount of harm done or prospective harm
that will be done going forward (Lazar 2018)? Such questions do not have easy answers.
Table 2.1 summarizes these common cognitive biases.
52
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

Bias
Description
Example
Confirmation
bias
The tendency to search for, interpret,
favor, and recall information that
confirms or supports prior beliefs
As part of their morning routine, a person scans news
headlines on the internet and chooses to read only
those stories that confirm views they already hold.
Anchoring
bias
The tendency to rely on initial values,
prices, or quantities when estimating
the actual value, price, or quantity of
something
When supplied with a random number and then asked
to provide a number estimate in response to a question,
people supply a number close to the random number
they were initially given.
Availability
heuristic
The tendency to evaluate new
information based on the most recent
or most easily recalled examples
People in the United States overestimate the probability
of dying in a criminal attack, since these types of stories
are easy to vividly recall.
Tribalism
The tendency for human beings to align
themselves with groups with whom
they share values and practices
People with a strong commitment to one political party
often struggle to objectively evaluate the political
positions of those who are members of the opposing
party.
Bandwagon
fallacy
The tendency to do something or
believe something because many other
people do or believe the same thing
Advertisers often rely on the bandwagon fallacy,
attempting to create the impression that “everyone” is
buying a new product, in order to inspire others to buy it.
Sunk cost
fallacy
The tendency to attach a value to things
in which resources have been invested
that is greater than the value those
things actually have
A business person continues to invest money in a failing
venture, “throwing good money after bad.”
Gambler’s
fallacy
The tendency to reason that future
chance events will be more likely if they
have not happened recently
Someone who regularly buys lottery tickets reasons that
they are “due to win,” since they haven’t won once in
twenty years.
TABLE 2.1 Common Cognitive Biases
As we have seen, cognitive biases are built into the way human beings process information. They are common to us
all, and it takes self-awareness and effort to overcome the tendency to fall back on biases. Consider a time when
you have fallen prey to one of the five cognitive biases described above. What were the circumstances? Recall your
thought process. Were you aware at the time that your thinking was misguided? What were the consequences of
succumbing to that cognitive bias?
Write a short paragraph describing how that cognitive bias allowed you to make a decision you now realize was
irrational. Then write a second paragraph describing how, with the benefit of time and distance, you would have
thought differently about the incident that triggered the bias. Use the tools of critical reflection and metacognition to
improve your approach to this situation. What might have been the consequences of behaving differently? Finally,
write a short conclusion describing what lesson you take from reflecting back on this experience. Does it help you
understand yourself better? Will you be able to act differently in the future? What steps can you take to avoid
cognitive biases in your thinking today?
THINK LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
2.2 • Overcoming Cognitive Biases and Engaging in Critical Reflection
53

2.3 Developing Good Habits of Mind
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define epistemic humility and the Dunning-Kruger effect.
•
Identify three strategies to increase the ability to think objectively.
•
Analyze emotional responses to information.
One of the ways to respond to cognitive biases is to develop good habits of mind. There are no quick fixes or
easy solutions to cognitive biases. Remember, these biases are a result of the way the brain works.
Nevertheless, metacognition and critical reflection, as well as good mental habits, can help combat these
natural tendencies in thought that otherwise leads us astray. The strategies outlined below can help you
become a better philosopher. You should compare them with the methods philosophers use to arrive at truth,
covered in Chapter 1.
CONNECTIONS
See the introduction to philosophy chapter to learn more about how philosophers arrive at the truth.
Strive for Objectivity
We are likely to assume that our experience or our perspective is generally true for others. To be more
objective in thinking about issues, problems, or values, we should actively engage in strategies that remove us
from our naturally subjective mindset. In this section, we will explore several strategies for approaching
philosophical problems with less subjective bias.
Abstract from Specific Circumstances
Most people’s point of view is based on generalizing from their specific circumstances and experiences.
However, if your view of morality, consciousness, or free will is tied to notions that come from a specific time or
location, then your view is not likely to be objective. Your personal experience has limitations when it comes to
understanding what is going on in the world at large. To arrive at more general and representative notions, use
your imagination to separate the specific properties of your experience from your worldview. This process of
abstraction can make the concept appropriately general. For instance, if you wish to imagine a governing
arrangement among citizens, you will probably default to the governmental organizations you are familiar with
in your community, state, or nation. But these institutions differ from the way government works in other
countries or in different eras of history. So when you think about justice in political organizations, it is
important to imagine those not limited by your personal experience, moment in history, or location.
In some cases, however, the specific features of your experience are indispensable to the philosophical
position you wish to take. In such instances, your specific experience provides critical information that needs
to be preserved. For example, the prevailing views in philosophy as well as any other subject are biased in that
they reflect the views of the dominant cultural group who wrote the texts. If you are a person who belongs to a
nondominant or minority group or a group that has been historically marginalized, your personal experience
may shed new light on a problem. In such cases, specific experience can help you, as well as others, reshape
the general view so that it is more comprehensive and inclusive. In these cases, abstracting from the particular
circumstances may not be useful.
Promote Alternative Points of View
Actively considering points of view contrary to your own is most useful in political or ethical areas of
philosophy. But a similar strategy may also be useful in metaphysics or epistemology. For instance, when
considering issues in metaphysics, you may believe that parts of experience—like consciousness, God, or free
will—cannot be explained by the natural sciences. Or, conversely, you may think there is a scientific
54
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

explanation for everything. When considering these views philosophically, try to actively promote the
alternative point of view. Sometimes this strategy is called steelmanning the opposing argument. When you
steelman an argument, you make the strongest possible case in favor of it. This is the opposite of
strawmanning an argument, in which you construct a weaker version of the argument to easily defeat it. You
may be tempted to strawman arguments you naturally disagree with, but you will become a better philosopher
when you steelman those arguments instead.
CONNECTIONS
Learn more about the strawman fallacy in the chapter on logic and reasoning.
Identify Counterexamples
Generating counterexamples is an effective way to test your own or others’ claims. A counterexample is an
instance that renders an argument invalid by satisfying all the premises of the claim but demonstrating the
conclusion is false. Suppose someone wants to argue that the only legitimate way to know something is to have
direct experience of it. To produce a counterexample to this claim, we must imagine something that everyone
knows is true but that would be impossible to experience directly. Here is an example: I know my mother was
born. Clearly, given that I was born, I had a mother, and she, too, must have been born to have given birth to
me. My mother’s birth necessarily preceded my birth by many years, so it would be impossible for me to have
any direct experience of my mother’s birth. And yet, just as surely as I know I was born, I know that my mother
was born. Counterexamples are powerful tools to use in evaluating philosophical arguments. If you practice
using this tool, you will become a better critical thinker.
CONNECTIONS
See the section on counterexamples in the chapter on logic and reasoning for more discussion of this topic.
Maintain Skepticism of Strong Emotions
While emotions play an important role in thinking, they can also cloud judgment. Strong reactions to claims
made by philosophers, other students, your professor, or anyone else may prevent you from considering the
argument objectively. You should be wary of any strong attachment or aversion you feel toward a philosophical
claim. Emotions can guide us, but they may threaten our ability to objectively consider the arguments being
made.
To respond to strong emotions, use the tools of metacognition to reflect on the source of those emotions and
attempt to manage them. There may be good reasons for your emotions, but recognize that those reasons, not
the emotions themselves, are philosophically relevant. Manage emotions by taking a step back from your
personal investment in the issue and considering it from another perspective. Sometimes a short break can
allow the immediate emotional reaction to subside. Sometimes imaginative strategies can help; for example,
substitute the features of the problem that trigger strong emotions for features that are more neutral. This
advice is not to suggest that emotions are harmful or have no place in philosophical thinking. Instead, the
purpose of this strategy is to remind you that the way to derive meaning and guidance from your emotions is to
reflect on them and think through the causes, origins, or reasons for the emotions.
Adopt Epistemic Humility
A final concept that is a critical component for becoming a better critical thinker is adopting a stance of
epistemic humility. As we have already seen, our thinking can be clouded by cognitive biases. Additionally,
our perspective on the world is always colored by our own experience and rooted in the particular place and
time in which we live. Finally, even our best scientific knowledge of the universe explains only a fraction of it,
and perhaps even less of our own experience. As a result, we should recognize these limitations of human
2.3 • Developing Good Habits of Mind
55

knowledge and rein in our epistemic confidence. We should recognize that the knowledge we do possess is
fragile, historical, and conditioned by a number of social and biological processes.
FIGURE 2.5 The principle of epistemic humility calls upon us to recognize that the knowledge we possess is fragile,
fallible, and colored by our own experiences. (credit: “Life is a long lesson in humility.” by e.r.w.i.n./Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Question Yourself: Do I Really Know What I Think I Know?
We retain all sorts of beliefs from many different sources: memory, testimony, sense perception, and
imagination. Some of these sources may be reliable, while others may not. Often, however, we forget the source
of our beliefs and claim to “know” something simply because we have believed it for a long time. We may
become very confident in believing something that never happened or did not happen in the way we
remember it. In other cases, we may have been told something repeatedly, but the ultimate source of that
information was unreliable. For instance, most people recommend wearing warm clothes outside when the
temperature drops so that they do not “catch a cold.” This is the sort of wisdom that may have been passed
down through generations, but it makes little sense from a medical standpoint. There are not many ways that
getting a chill or even lowering the body temperature will lead to a respiratory infection. Colds are caused by
viruses, not by a drop in temperature. Without thinking through the source of the belief that “if you get cold,
you may catch a cold,” you end up believing something that is not true.
Be Aware of the Dunning-Kruger Effect
An even more pernicious form of epistemic overconfidence is revealed in the psychological phenomenon
known as the Dunning-Kruger effect. David Dunning and Justin Kruger demonstrated a widespread illusion
in which incompetent people or novices rate their own knowledge of a subject more highly than they ought to,
while highly competent people or experts rate their knowledge slightly lower than they ought to. These
findings do not mean that the experts considered themselves to be less competent than novices. In fact,
experts are fairly accurate in rating their own knowledge. However, they tend to assume that everyone else has
a similar level of expertise. By contrast, novices consider themselves to be far more competent in comparison
to others and misrepresent their own incompetence, which can be a dangerous in many situations.
The lesson from the Dunning-Kruger effect is that you should be extremely wary when assessing your
expertise about anything, but especially about something that is a new area of learning for you. The reality is
that your intuitive sense of your own knowledge is likely to be inaccurate. It takes time to build expertise in a
subject area, and the expert is more capable of assessing their own knowledge accurately.
56
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

2.4 Gathering Information, Evaluating Sources, and Understanding Evidence
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify four moves for fact-checking.
•
Apply fact-checking to specific exercises.
Start with a Strong Foundation
When you are learning a new concept or writing a paper, you probably do some internet research to locate
information about the topic. However, as you probably know, not all internet sources are reliable. Philosophy
students are fortunate to have two online philosophy encyclopedias that provide excellent information about a
wide array of topics. The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (https://openstax.org/r/ieputmedu) provides
good general topic coverage of the major areas of philosophy. The IEP is a traditional encyclopedia, and its
articles are written for new students without a lot of prior knowledge. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(https://openstax.org/r/platostanford) provides in-depth, up-to-date articles on a wide range of topics and
includes both general and specific coverage. The articles in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy are well
written, but they typically go into greater depth and sometimes include technical terms or information you will
have to look up. These articles provide an excellent, free introduction to a wide range of specific topics in
philosophy. As with all encyclopedia entries, students should start with the article itself and then move on to
sources cited in the article. Think of these articles as an entry point into research.
Wherever possible, read articles and books written by philosophers on the topics you are interested in. You can
usually find these resources at your college or university library. You may want to cast a wider net on the
internet itself by tapping into YouTube channels, podcasts, and other websites that can help you understand
philosophical issues or provide information for philosophy papers. However, be discriminating when selecting
material. In this section, we will outline some tools and habits that can make you a better, more critically
engaged online researcher.
Finally, many instructors in philosophy will encourage their students to engage only with the assigned texts in
the class. This can be a valuable technique for learning philosophy since philosophical thinking is cultivated by
serious, critical engagement with good philosophical writing. If you can learn to engage directly with primary
sources (texts written by philosophers about philosophy), you will be a better philosophy student. However, we
acknowledge that most students are accustomed to using the internet for research when they are learning
something new. So this section is intended to provide some guidance for students who want to supplement
their class readings with information gleaned from online sources.
The SIFT Method (Four Moves for Student Fact Checkers)
Information literacy scholar Michael Caulfield came to realize that the methods of research taught by
librarians and information literacy educators often did not work well for students. Typically, students are
encouraged to assess the quality of information using an acronym like CRAAP: currency, relevancy, authority,
accuracy, and purpose. But these criteria are not always useful in spotting misinformation turned up through
search engines. After all, many sources that provide misinformation appear current and relevant and are
generated by organizations that appear to be authoritative while they conceal a hidden agenda.
To find out how students evaluate sources they find on Google, Caulfield relies on the empirical research of
Sam Wineburg and Sarah Mcgrew (2016). The researchers compared the behavior of Stanford University
students to trained fact-checkers at newspapers and magazines. Not surprisingly, the online fact-checkers
used search engines more effectively. Based on this research, Caulfield developed his own protocol to make
students better researchers.
The first thing to know about using a search engine like Google is that results are not ranked by authority,
accuracy, or relevance. Internet companies are notoriously secretive about the algorithms (mathematical
2.4 • Gathering Information, Evaluating Sources, and Understanding Evidence
57

procedural rules) they use to generate search engine results, but we know that they prioritize paid
advertisements, popularity, and web interconnectivity (the degree to which key words and links from a website
are shared with other websites). Thus, websites interested in sharing misinformation can use the same search
engine optimization tools that legitimate companies or media sources use to move up the ranks of search
results. So you need to learn to use the search engine to your advantage. Caulfield recommends using the
acronym SIFT, or the “four moves” of student fact checkers.
FIGURE 2.6 The four moves for student fact checkers: stop; investigate the source; find better coverage; and trace
the claims to the original context. (credit: “SIFT (The Four Moves)” by Michael Caulfield/hapgood.us, CC BY 4.0)
Stop
The first move reiterates something we have already discussed: to become a better critical thinker, slow down
the quick and efficient thinking that leads to errors and engage in critical reflection and metacognition. By
stopping, slowing down, or taking your time to allow for critical reflection, you will be using rational and
reflective thinking to assess claims. Additionally, after some searching, you will want stop, return to your
original source, and check its claims again. When you circle back after going down a bit of a rabbit hole, you
will have a new perspective from which to evaluate these claims.
Investigate the Source
Next, investigate the source of your information. Internet searches will often lead you through a series of links,
in which you jump from one document to another. Strive to understand this electronic paper trail. Who wrote
each document? What are their credentials? You can prioritize academic sources, such as web pages of
philosophy faculty members, and you can discount sites that aggregate student papers or provide content
without clear authorship. But investigating authorship does not mean that you should just read the “About”
page on a website. Rather, Wineburg and Mcgrew (2016) found that fact-checkers used search tools to check
the reputation of the sites they were investigating, a move they called “reading laterally.” You do not have to
spend a lot of time on the site itself. Instead, search reviews or critiques of the website and the authors on the
site. Find out what other authoritative sources say about the site. Is this a website that is approved by other
people you trust? Or do people you trust indicate that the website or its information are questionable?
Find Better Coverage
Check the claims and information on the site you are reading. What do other sources say about the same
information? Is there other coverage on the same topic? This move is particularly important for controversial
claims you might find on social media, where the original source is frequently obscured. Is this information
being covered elsewhere, and does the coverage agree with what you have read? This move can help in
evaluating your original source or gaining familiarity with the claims being made. If the claims by one source
do not match up with what you are reading elsewhere, be skeptical.
58
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

Trace Claims, Quotes, and Media to the Original Context
Frequently, claims made on the internet are divorced from their original context. It is important to trace those
claims back to the original source. This advice holds for online research in philosophy. You may discover a
claim or quote about a philosopher that lacks context. To evaluate the claim, you need its original context,
which will reveal whether the claim or quote was mischaracterized or portrayed in a misleading way. Look for
citations, and then follow those citations to the original publication. If the source you have found does not have
citations, then you will need to search key terms or phrases in quotation marks to see if you can locate the
claim or quote using another method. Good academic sources ought to provide citations so you can verify the
original source of the claim. If it is hard to verify a claim or quote, that should be a red flag to not trust the
source making those claims or providing those quotes.
Here are three examples of claims made online. Use the four moves to assess whether these claims are true. You
have been provided with a screen capture of a headline, so you do not have links back to a website. Therefore, use
search tools on the web to verify the claims being made. In each case, find a source that either verifies or debunks
the claim. The source you use to verify or debunk the claim should be reputable and authoritative.
Mexico’s Border Wall
This post claims to be picture of fencing from Mexico’s southern border. Is the photo accurate? Is this an image of
Mexico’s southern border? Has the Mexican government constructed a wall to prevent the flow of migrants from
across its southern border?
FIGURE 2.7 This social media image claims to show a wall Mexico constructed on its southern border. (credit:
“Mexico’s Border Wall?” by Michael Caulfield/fourmoves.blog, CC BY 4.0)
Smart Toilet?
This image was shared on the web. Is it a real product or satire?
THINK LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
2.4 • Gathering Information, Evaluating Sources, and Understanding Evidence
59

FIGURE 2.8 This web headline about Kohler’s smart toilet, under the heading “Smart Home,” suggests that Kohler’s
has invented a smart toilet that uses Alexa. (credit: “Alexa Smart Toilet” by Michael Caulfield/fourmoves.blog, CC BY
4.0)
Drilling Stonehenge?
FIGURE 2.9 This newspaper headline claims that engineers drilled a hole into Stonehenge as part of a controversial
tunnel project. (credit: “Stonehenge damaged by blundering engineers?” by Michael Caulfield/fourmoves.blog, CC
BY 4.0)
2.5 Reading Philosophy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe strategies for reading philosophy.
•
Distinguish the goals of philosophical reading from other types of reading.
•
Employ a three-part method for reading philosophy.
60
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

To be successful in a philosophy course, you must be able to read primary and secondary sources in
philosophy. Many students in their first philosophy class struggle with the required readings. You may find
yourself rereading a passage several times without having a clear notion of what the author is trying to say. Or
you may get lost in the back-and-forth of arguments and counterarguments, forgetting which represent the
author’s opinion. This is a common problem. Using the strategies described below, you can track the key
claims and arguments in your reading. Eventually, you will reach the point where you can begin to reflect on,
evaluate, and engage with the philosophical concepts presented.
Prepare to Read
Preparing your reading space will help you focus and improve the chances of retaining the reading material.
Read at a table with a comfortable chair instead of on a couch or in a bed. Sitting up straight improves
concentration. Have something to drink nearby, and avoid distractions, like TV or music with lyrics. Some
people find it helpful to have a little bit of bustle around them (for example, you might choose to work in a café
or library), while others find this distracting. Some people like music; others prefer silence. Find the setting
that helps you concentrate.
Next, choose an annotation tool. You will need to write notes, underline, and flag portions of the reading, so use
text you can alter whenever possible. If you are working with a printed text, use a pencil so that you can erase
and rewrite notes in the margin. Many students use highlighters when reading text, but readers have a
tendency to highlight too much, which makes the highlighting useless when you go back and reread. A better
system is to write marginal notes or markers to flag and identify key passages. You can devise a simple coding
system using symbols to identify different parts of a text: for example, main ideas or topics, examples,
arguments, references to other philosophers, questions, and quotations to use in papers. If you are working
with a digital text, there are many tools you can use to write notes and place markers in the text. OpenStax
provides a useful annotation tool for its web-based textbooks, allowing you to create notes that link passages
and even to review your notes all together. The purpose of annotation is to create a visual trail you can come
back to for easy tracking of an argument. This will ensure you do not need to reread large portions of the text to
find key information for studying or writing a paper. Annotations allow you to move quickly through a text,
identifying key passages for quotes or citations, understanding the flow of the argument, and remembering the
key claims or points made by the author.
Engaging with Philosophical Texts
The purpose of philosophical writing is to engage the reader in a sequence of thoughts that either present a
problem to be considered, prompt reflection on previous ideas and works, or lead to some insight or
enlightenment. Philosophy consists of ideas and arguments. Your goal is to engage with those ideas and
arguments to arrive at your own understanding of the issues. You may critically engage with the author, or you
may have your perspective changed by reading the author. In either case, your goal ought to be to reach a new
understanding. This is somewhat different from writing in most other disciplines, in which the purpose may
be to convey information, evoke emotions, tell a story, or produce aesthetic enjoyment. While engaging with
philosophical ideas can be pleasurable and may involve understanding some basic information, the primary
purpose of the writing is to engage thought and reflection. This means that you should read the work as fast or
slow as you need to engage thoughtfully with it. The speed of reading will depend on how quickly you grasp the
ideas and arguments presented or how familiar you are with the claims being made. It is not as important to
read sequentially for plot or narrative; much more important is to follow the sequence of ideas and arguments.
Consequently, it may make sense to cross-reference passages, jumping from one section to another to
compare claims, and link ideas that appear in different places in the text.
Philosophical Methods at Work
Look for philosophical methods at work in your readings. Recall that philosophers use a variety of methods to
arrive at truth, including conceptual analysis, logic, and the consideration of trade-offs. Philosophers may also
2.5 • Reading Philosophy
61

draw on a variety of sources of evidence, including history, intuition, common sense, or empirical results from
other disciplines or from experimental philosophy. In any case, most philosophical works will be attempting to
develop a position through argumentation. Sources of evidence will be used to bolster premises for the
purpose of reaching a desired conclusion. Additionally, the author may use a variety of methods to make an
argument. If you can identify these methods, strategies, and sources of evidence, you will be able to better
evaluate the text.
The Principle of Charity
The principle of charity is an interpretative principle that advises the reader to interpret the author’s
statements in the most rational and best way possible. Sometimes a philosopher’s argument may be unclear or
ambiguous. For example, philosophers from older historical periods may use terminology and expressions
that are difficult for a modern reader to understand. In these cases, the reader should start from the
assumption that the author is putting forward a rational, thoughtful view. The reader’s goal should be to
understand that view in the best light possible. This does not mean that you should ignore difficulties or avoid
criticizing the author. Rather, when you encounter difficulties, look for an interpretation that makes the most
sense of what the author is saying. All the primary- and secondary-source authors you will read are smart,
thoughtful people. Therefore, assume the author has a response to simple or obvious objections, and look for
that response. Try to understand the work on its own terms, and then critically engage with the best version of
that work.
Working with the Dialectic
The dialectical process that is common to many philosophical writings is initially confusing for many students.
Dialectic, a method for discovering truth through dialogue, involves an exchange of ideas with the goal of
arriving at a position that more accurately reflects the truth. In practical terms, philosophers will frequently
move back and forth between the view they are advancing and competing views that they may or may not
support. These alternative views may provide criticisms, or they may represent views that are common in
philosophy. The author’s goal is to present alternative perspectives—in addition to their own—to demonstrate
the range of perspectives on the problem. If one view emerges through this dialectical process, there is a
greater chance that it has some share of the truth since it has survived the criticisms and contrary opinions of
others.
When reading a philosophical work that uses a dialectical method, pay attention to tracking different strands
of argument. Do not assume that every argument or claim in what you are reading is the considered opinion of
the author. Rather, various claims may represent contrasting views that will eventually be rejected. Track the
back-and-forth between views to grasp the thread of argument that the author endorses.
62
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 2.10 Find a comfortable place to do your philosophy readings. (credit: "Woman sitting in the forest and
reading a book, autumn rest" by Marco Verch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Pre-reading
Start your reading with a pre-read. This is a very useful practice when tackling academic works. So much
information can be learned simply by reviewing the surrounding features of the article, book, or chapter.
Spend some time reviewing these elements to grasp the context for what you are about to read. Start with these
elements.
Title, Author, and Publication
What does the title and author tell you about the work? When was it written? Who has published the text—an
academic press or a popular press? If you do not know this information, you may want to do some preliminary
internet searches to try to find out. Where does this work fit into the author’s broader body of work? What can
you learn or what do you know about the author? What are the author’s main contributions to philosophy?
Table of Contents and Bibliography
Develop a mental outline for the work by looking carefully at the table of contents, usually at the front of the
book. For a shorter work, scan through the article, looking for section headings and breaks. If the headings are
labeled, you may have enough information to track the general flow of the article just by reading them. If the
headings are not helpful or there are no headings, quickly skim the first and last paragraph, and pick out topic
sentences or words that indicate what individual paragraphs are about to get a sense of where the overall
argument is going.
At this stage, you want to look at the bibliography or references. Depending on the length and style of the work,
the reference list may be very long. As a novice, you may not be able to get much information from a
bibliography, but as you become more familiar with your subject, you will get a sense from titles and authors in
the bibliography about the perspective that informs this author’s writing.
First Read
You may need to read material more than once to become engaged in critical reflection. However, because you
are planning to do multiple readings, do not linger too long on the first read. Move quickly and purposefully
through the material with the goal of understanding the flow of the argument. Use the information you gleaned
from pre-reading to fill in gaps in knowledge where possible, and flag places for follow-up.
Identify Key Claims
During the first read, you should identify the key claims in the text. In a traditional academic article, these
2.5 • Reading Philosophy
63

claims ought to be highlighted in the introduction or abstract. In a book or historical work, these key claims
may be harder to find. Look for sentences that introduce claims with expressions such as, “I aim to show,”
“What this chapter will demonstrate,” or “The purpose of this work is.” Mark key claims so that you can come
back to them easily. Ask yourself what the author is trying to say; what does the author hope the reader will
take away from reading?
Identify Sources of Evidence and Methods of Argument
Look for the evidence the author is providing to support the key claims. What methods does the author use to
generate this evidence? Is the author using logical argumentation? Are there thought experiments or other
forms of conceptual analysis? Does the author provide empirical evidence to back up the claims? In the best-
case scenario, evidence will be provided shortly before or after the claim is announced. However, sometimes
evidence and claims are mixed together. During this stage, try to flag the dialectic in the argument. Is the
author presenting their own view, a rival view, a criticism, or a supporting view?
Flag for Follow-Up
Use annotation flags to chart the course of the argument and claims being made. Use a simple notation system
that works for you. But you should consider flagging things like thesis, definition, claim, evidence, argument,
question, counterargument, objection, response, and so forth. Flagging should also be used to identify words
or ideas you do not understand. When you are moving quickly, you may ask questions that you later
understand, or you may flag something incorrectly and need to revise your notes. This is fine. You are engaged
in a process of gradually becoming acquainted with the text.
Close Read
At this stage, you will read for thoughtful engagement with the ideas and arguments presented in the text. Now
is when you critically reflect on, evaluate, and understand the author’s writing.
At this point, you should not move any more quickly than you can think alongside the author. Use this time to
follow up on questions you posed during flagging. Look up terms; do some research on concepts you do not
understand. You do not need to understand the article perfectly, but you should understand it well enough to
think about it. If you have a good understanding of what you read, you will have something to say about the
material after you finish reading it.
Reading slowly and actively involves asking the author questions: How does this claim follow from that one?
Where is the evidence to support this assertion? Is the evidence adequate to support the claim being made?
What are the implications of this claim? How does this idea fit with the overall emphasis on some other set of
ideas? If something in the text does not sit well with you, try to articulate what is bothering you. Write a short
objection in the margin. Even if you are not sure, try to work out why you do not agree with the author. The
more you can articulate your concerns and think through your own reactions, the more you will understand
the material and your own reaction to it.
The close reading is intended to prepare you for talking and writing about the author’s work. That means you
are preparing yourself to do philosophy alongside and with the author. Hold yourself to the same standards to
which you hold the author. Provide reasons for your claims, support your opinions with adequate evidence,
and consider possible objections.
Identify a reading from Chapter 1 (or another introductory reading from this course). This exercise will work best if
the reading is a fairly short, primary source reading from someone who is doing philosophy. Follow the three-step
method for reading:
READ LIKE A PHILOSOPHER
64
2 • Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
Access for free at openstax.org
